LAWS3702 Corporate Law Learning Guide 2026 2 LAWS3702 Course Administration and Information Teaching Staff The Course Coordinator is Assoc Prof Dr Radha Ivory. Other teachers in the course are Prof Ross Grantham, Dr Vicky Comino, Dr Kim Weinert, and Mr Frankie Berardi. Our details are available on Blackboard. Consultation You’re welcome to approach us with questions. Substantive question go to your tutor, preferably during the tutorials or immediately before/after. Please direct administrative questions to Radha by email or after tutorials/lectures. Consultations are by appointment, except before the assessment items. Then Q&A sessions will be scheduled. Lecture and tutorials There are twelve lectures in the course and ten tutorials. All are designed to be interactive, so inperson attendance is strongly encouraged. That said, attendance is not assessed and, if you don’t want to interact, you’re welcome to tell your teacher. The schedule of topics is in the table below. Time requirements Corporate Law will make more sense and be less stressful if you keep on top of the readings and your notes. It’s not a course you can cram for as we cover several new ideas, as well as a major piece of legislation and (associated) cases. University policies say that you’ll need to devote approximately 10 hours per week (including class contact time) for satisfactory progress in a two-unit course like this one. That’s a realistic estimate. Reading For each lecture there is a Reading Guide (see Blackboard) and, for each lecture, there are required and further readings, plus a table of key sections from the legislation. Required readings The required readings are a short selection of primary and secondary sources. The primary sources are generally leading cases. We do not tell you which paragraphs to read. However, we sometimes say that cases should be read ‘as relevant’. This means that you need to understand the facts and the points of law, as applied, but you don’t need to read every paragraph of the case, word-for-word. Focus your reading on the relevant sections of description, exposition and application. The secondary sources are selected to give you a clear overview of the subject matter and more detail than we can provide in class. They are generally chapters from the course textbook, S Bottomley et al, Contemporary Australian Corporate Law (3rd edn, Cambridge University Press, 2025) (Bottomley). A subscription of Bottomley is currently being negotiated by the Library with the publisher. In cases of shortages, we have also set alterative reading from last year’s textbook, J Harris and T Peters, Company Law – Theories, Principles and Application (3rd ed, LexisNexis, 2023) (Harris) for the first few weeks. Key instruments This table list key statutory or soft law instruments that are relevant to the topic, along with the relevant provisions. Most are sections, parts and/or chapters from the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (CA), which is one of the required resource for this course. Again, we expect you to read these provisions, though 3 we don’t expect you to read every section in the same degree of detail. Be guided by our discussion in class, when choosing where to put your focus. A question we get every year is how to access the CA. Our standard answer is that you should consider buying the act, as consolidated with the regulations and other relevant materials. It is expensive to print the CA and bind it yourself, and it is time consuming to print each section as we go. That said, from experience, most students read from a soft copy of the CA and cut and paste the key sections into their notes. If this is going to be your approach, please make sure you are using the latest version of the act, which is available on the Federal Register of Legislation. Further readings The further readings are cases and secondary material (textbooks, monographs, journal articles, etc) that elaborate on specific points or contain alternative general accounts of a topic. It is up to you to decide what you read of these; however, we assume that that you understand ratio and the facts of the cases, and generally they make more sense if your read them. Other textbooks you may find useful are: R Grantham, The Law and Practice of Corporate Governance (2nd, LexisNexis, 2023) (Grantham). R Austin & I Ramsay, Ford’s Principles of Corporations Law (17th ed, LexisNexis, 2018) (Ford) P Davies and S Worthington, Gower and Davies' Principles of Modern Company Law (11th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, 2021) Assessment There are two items of assessment in this course: 1) an Interactive Oral Assessment (IOA) and 2) an End of Semester (EoS) examination. Both are worth 50% and both are outlined in the Electronic Course Profile. More detail will be provided in class and in task sheets that will be uploaded to Blackboard in due course. 4 TW Week beg. Content Tutorial Number, Content & Reading Other Activities 1 23-Feb-25 Lecture 1 – Companies and company law 2 2-Mar-25 Lecture 2 – Corporate governance and regulation 3 9-Mar-25 Lecture 3 – Corporate personality and liability Tutorial 1: Building on content from Lecture 1 (Companies and Company Law) IOA Problem 1 released 4 16-Mar-25 Lecture 4 – Internal structures and the operations Tutorial 2: Building on content from Lecture 2 & 3 (Corporate governance, personality and liability) IOA Problem 2 released 5 23-Mar-25 Lecture 5 – Corporate contracting Tutorial 3: Building on content from Lecture 4 (internal structures and operations) IOA Problem 3 released / Partner Meetings to Problem 1 conducted 6 30-Mar-25 Lecture 6 – Directors' Duties 1 (care & diligence) Tutorial 4: Building on content from Lecture 5 (corporate contracting) IOA Partner Meetings to Problem 2 conducted 6-Apr-25 Mid-semester break 7 13-Apr-25 Lecture 7 – Directors' duties 2 (loyalty & good faith) Tutorial 5: Building on content from Lecture 6 (duty of care) IOA Partner Meetings to Problem 3 conducted 8 20-Apr-25 Lecture 8 – Directors' duties 3 (Related Party Transactions and Enforcement of Directors' Duties) Tutorial 6: Building on content from Lecture 7 (duties of loyalty) 9 27-Apr-25 Lecture 9 – Minority protection No tutorials this week due to the ANZAC Day holiday 10 4-May-25 Lecture 10 – Corporate Disclosure Tutorial 7: Building on content from Lecture 8 (enforcement) 11 11-May-25 Lecture 11 – Corporate Finance Tutorial 8: Building on content from Lecture 9 (minority protection) 12 18-May-25 Lecture 12 – External Administration Tutorial 9: Building on content from Lecture 10 & 11  (corporate disclosure and finance) 13 25-May-25 Revision Week Tutorial 10: Building on content from Lecture 12 (external administration)
