LAWS3702 Corporate Law Tutorial Guide 2 General Instructors Answer the questions below using the relevant lecture and associated readings in the Reading Guides. 

Tutorial 1: Building on Content from Lecture 1 (Companies and Company Law) Question Sergio and Elisa are siblings with complementary but different personalities. Sergio has people skills and a flair for management but is risk averse. Elisa, who studies engineering, is introverted, hands-on and a risk taker. Through incredible hard work and abstemiousness, Sergio has saved enough cash to put down a deposit on a unit in the outer suburbs of Brisbane. His idea is to buy the flat, live in it, and then sell it later for a profit. Sergio is prepared to ‘flip’ the property by himself or to cut in Elisa. If the latter, they’ve discussed that she could use her ‘handy woman’ skills to help fix up the unit and contribute to the repayments. Meantime, Elisa (an engineering student) has completed a promising project in one of her courses. Together with two classmates, she managed to refine a technology that prevents mid-air collisions between drones. Elisa’s lecturer says that there is considerable potential to commercialise the refined technology, including for use in pilot-less planes. He has offered to put Elisa and her friends in touch with a venture capitalist. Advise Sergio and Elisa on which business structure they should use to pursue each of these two ideas. Include in your advice a discussion of the relative advantages and disadvantages of that structure in the circumstances, and some tips on establishing that structure so that it is best suited to their situation. 

Tutorial 2: Building on Content from Lectures 2 and 3 (Corporate Governance and Personality) This tutorial will be run as a very simple debate. You will work in teams to prepare arguments for and against the following propositions.

1. Limited liability is good for society.
2. Australian federal law is soft on corporate crime. To prepare for this tutorial, make notes about the possible arguments on your own by reflecting on the Lecture 2 and associated readings. And, no: you won’t need to talk in front of the class if you don’t want to! 3 Tutorial 3: Building on Content from Lecture 4 (Internal Structures and Operations) Question 1 The directors of International Ltd and Local Ltd agreed to commence a new business to be owned by a new company, Alpha Pty Ltd (‘Alpha’), whose share capital would be divided into two classes as follows: Ordinary shares – $1 issue price:
• 500,000 – International Ltd
• 250,000 – Local Ltd Preference shares – $2 issue price
• 100,000 – Betty (director and 50% shareholder of International Ltd)
• 100,000 – Charles (director and 50% shareholder of International Ltd)
• 100,000 – Rachel (director and 50% shareholder of Local Ltd) It was agreed that Betty, Charles, and Rachel would be the first directors of Alpha, with Rachel also appointed as secretary. International Ltd and Local Ltd also agreed that the internal governance rules of Alpha should provide that: a) A person nominated by Local must be the chair of Alpha and that the chair should have both a vote as well as a casting vote at directors’ meetings; b) A person nominated by International Ltd must be the managing director of Alpha and the person so appointed cannot be removed from that position unless International Ltd specifically agreed; c) Alpha’s ordinary shareholders would have six votes per share and preference shareholders, one vote per share at shareholders’ meetings; and d) An Alpha shareholder can only transfer their shares to existing shareholders. The transfer price must be the market price as determined by an independent valuer. Advise whether Alpha should rely on the replaceable rules in the above circumstances or whether a constitution would be more appropriate. Question 2 Traction Shoe Pty Ltd (‘Traction’) operated a bulldozer manufacturing and export business from premises at Hole Street. The directors of Traction were Tilly and William. The 2,500 issued shares in Traction were originally all owned by Construction Pty Ltd (‘Construction’), a company also owned and controlled by Tilly and William. The day-to-day operation and management of Traction were undertaken by Tilly and Traction’s operations manager, Nigel. Tilly asked her close personal friend, Bruce, if he was interested in investing $1,000,000 in return for 40% of the shares in Traction. Tilly told Bruce that Traction needed the money for the expansion of its business. There was detailed discussion as to the expansion envisaged. Bruce instructed Tilly to look for new premises for the expansion, especially as Bruce had heard rumours of the sale of a rival business, Digger Pty Ltd. Digger owned premised at Caterpillar Court. Bruce received a written sale contract on Construction letterhead recording that Construction had received $500,000 from Bruce, on behalf of Buffet Enterprises Ltd, for the purchase of 20% (500 shares) in Traction. This meant Construction retained 80% (2,000 shares). Bruce said he would consider a further $500,000 investment if Construction was willing to sell more shares, depending on the progress of expansion plans. 4 a) If Bruce acquired a stake of 20% of the shares in Traction in his own name, outline the extent to which he could influence the day-to-day management of the company. b) Would your answer to a) be any different if Bruce acquired an 80% stake? c) As a further inducement for Bruce to invest in the company, Tilly said that if Bruce acquired 20% of the shares, Bruce could appoint one director to the board of directors. In what circumstances, and on what basis, would such an arrangement be enforceable by Bruce? Tutorial 4: Building on Content from Lecture 5 (Corporate Contracting) Grandview Property Developers Ltd (‘GPD’) is a property development company based in Noosa that focuses on purchasing old, dilapidated homes and then renovating them for sale. The directors of GPD are Ann, Brian and Carol, with Carol taking care of the finances of the company. GPD employs a team of around 10 business development managers to identify properties for purchase, and finances most of its purchases through loans from banks and property finance providers. David is a new business development manager with GPD and has identified a property in Maryborough for purchase by GPD. He contacts Quickee Property Lenders Pty Ltd (QPL) (one of the property financiers that GPD has dealt with previously) and speaks with Elizabeth (who is a lending manager). Elizabeth has only worked from QPL for a few months. David requests a loan of $200,000 and shows Elizabeth photos of the property. He enthusiastically explains how he believes it is very good value investment that will double in value. By email the next day, David requests Elizabeth to transfer $200,000 into an account named ‘GPD Maryborough’. David describes himself in his email signature block as ‘Business Development Director’. Elizabeth is somewhat confused about this arrangement. Upon checking QPL’s records, she notices that QPL has always previously advanced funds into an account named ‘GPD Ltd’. Elizabeth phones GPD’s office and the phone is answered by the receptionist named Fiona (unbeknownst to Elizabeth, Fiona is David’s second cousin). In response to Elizabeth’s questions, Fiona says that Carol told her to say that GPD is using a new accounting arrangement (which is untrue). Elizabeth then deposits the $200,000 requested by David into the ‘GPD Maryborough’ account. One month later, after the first repayment by was due but not paid, Elizabeth rings GPD’s office to follow up. Carol answers and explains that David and Fiona have left the company and moved overseas. Carol states that she knows nothing about the ‘GPD Maryborough’ account. Advise QPL whether GPD could be held liable for the $200,000 loan. Tutorial 5: Building on Content from Lecture 6 (Directors’ Duties 1, The Duty of Care and Diligence) Swipe Ltd (Swipe) is a listed public company in the technology business. It has had great success by developing and marketing a technology for securely holding sensitive personal data (e.g., customer details, tax file numbers, credit card information etc). Swipe’s customers include major health insurance companies and banks. Swift has four directors: David, Sharon, Todd, Fred and Melissa. David and Sharon are both also employed in the business, David as Chief Technology Officer and Managing Director, and Sharon as Chief Financial Officer and Chair of the Board. Todd, Fred and Melissa are independent non-executive directors with backgrounds in the technology and data management business. Roger was a director and CEO of Swipe but resigned early last year to pursue other business opportunities. However, Roger remains the single largest investor in Swift and has significant influence over Swift’s business. Among other things, David and Sharon still report to Roger on Swift’s activities every week over informal ‘coffee catch-ups’. Roger is a notoriously commanding personality and both David and 5 Sharon find it quite difficult to challenge his opinions on how they should run the company on a day-today basis. They do not decide any issues of importance without first consulting Roger and asking for his approval. In January this year, at Todd, Fred and Melissa’s urging, David commissioned an internal investigation into the security of Swipe’s technology products. The report was authored by Swipe’s top engineers and found that Swipe’s major product had a significant vulnerability to hacking. The vulnerability meant the personal data held by Swipe’s customers could be accessed and published by hackers. The report said that such attack would be ‘catastrophic’ for Swipe’s business. When David receives the report in March, he immediately forwards it to Roger and who tells him to ‘bury it’. David therefore pays the engineers who conducted the investigations to leave the company and tells the board, at their next meeting, that the engineers were dismissed for misconduct before they could hand in their findings. Todd, Fred and Melissa question David closely about this claim but choose to accept David’s version of events when Sharon tries to close down the discussion of that agenda item. (Sharon is not interested in the technical part of the business and so is keen for the meeting to move on to other matters). Swipe’s major product is hacked and sensitive data stolen from one of its banking customers. Swipe’s share price crashes in light of the bad publicity and the civil lawsuits and regulatory actions it now faces. Advise Swipe on issues relating to breach of the duty of care. Tutorial 6: Building on Content from Lecture 7 (Directors’ Duties 2, The Duties of Loyalty) Question 1 Clear Vision Ltd (CVL) is a small unlisted information technology company operating in Brisbane’s outer suburbs. Marlow is the majority shareholder, with 67% of the shares. The remaining shares are owned by Sean (20%) and Becky (13%). Each of Marlow, Sean and Becky sit on the board of CVL, but Marlow is effectively the governing director of the firm. The constitution provides that the object of CVL is to deliver expert advice to businesses considering IT investments. It is through Marlow that CVL provides these services. Sean and Becky trust Marlow to run the business in their collective interests. Until recently, CVL was an unassuming company. Its annual turnover was sufficient to cover Marlow’s salary and a small dividend to Sean and Becky, but not much more. Any excess was reinvested in business items, like new computers and programs. Then, some months ago, Marlow made, what he thinks will be a major technological breakthrough. Whilst completing a project for one of CVL’s regular clients, he discovered a new type of block chain that, in his view, could have significant applications in the defence industry. Marlow asks Sean and Becky whether they would be willing to contribute more capital to develop the block chain product further. Both refuse. Sean tells Marlow that ‘it would be unethical to make money from an industry of war’. Becky says that there are few guarantees that the research would yield any return: she regards the new technology as too speculative. Marlow, therefore, approaches Polly, his new romantic partner, about the possibility of investment. Polly is willing to put up the cash but only if the profits are split two ways between her and Marlow. Marlow is very happy about Polly’s willingness to support the project, in part, because he loves her and believes that the investment will be an excellent use of her savings. However, he is also angry at Sean and Becky and quite willing to cause a little pain to them through CVL. Marlow seeks your advice as to whether he can resign from CVL and incorporate a new company through which to conduct the block chain business with Polly and himself as the sole shareholders and directors. What is your advice to Marlow? How would your answer change, if at all, were CVL’s constitution to contain a clause identical to s 194 Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)? 6 Question 2 You advise Aussie Trades Pty Ltd (Trades), a family-owned company that runs a chain of specialty trades supply shops in the Eastern states of Australia. Trades’ founder, major shareholder and CEO, Terry, would like to make a large donation of company money to an internet influencer who is popular among Trades’ customers and who is a vocal supporter of ‘traditional family values’. The influencers’ posts often include statements that some people find offensive, e.g., about the principal responsibility of women for child rearing and men for decision-making and income generation. Under what circumstances would you advise Terry to make the payment? Tutorial 7: Building on Content from Lecture 8 (Directors’ Duties 3, Enforcement) For each of the scenarios in Tutorials 5 and 6, consider what would be the most appropriate remedy for any alleged breaches and explain your answers. Tutorial 8: Building on Content from Lecture 9 (Minority Protection) Question 1 Pets Pty Ltd (Pets) operates a business selling pet products (dog and cat food, kitty litter, leashes, etc) all around Australia. Pets is owned by Merve, Saxon, Roger and Olive. Merve and Saxon together own 75% of the shares and are Managing Director and Company Secretary respectively. Roger and Olivia own 25% of the remaining shares between them. Although they are minority shareholders, Roger and Olive like to be informed about what is happening in the business. As they were friends of Merve’s late mum, Merve and Saxon have indulged them. However, this practice has become tedious and Merve and Saxon see a way out. They have recently met Brandy. She sees potential in Pets and has offered to loan Pets enough money to buy out Roger and Olive’s share of the capital. However, Roger and Olive don’t want to sell their shares. Merve and Saxon wonder whether they can change the constitution to force Roger and Olive to sell their shares to them (Merve and Saxon). They tell you that they are desperate to reduce the time they spend on managing this business, as they have a family and other investments to see to as well. The company accountant has calculated that Pets could pay Roger and Olive 1.25% of the estimated market price of their shares; the accountant is willing to put that in writing. Advise Merve and Saxon. Question 2 Ajax Pty Ltd is a family company on Brisbane’s southside. It was established by Manuel Ajax, in the 1970s, to run a car garage. It grew to also own a second-hand car yard and a spare parts business. It is still profitable. Ajax has a constitution (called a ‘Memorandum of Association’) which gives the Managing Director wide powers to manage the business of the company and veto share transfers. The Memorandum also states that the object of the company is to ‘conduct business in the transport sector’. While Manuel was still alive, he owned all the shares in Ajax and was Managing Director; there was no other director in the company. Manuel dominated the business through his constitutional powers, business acumen and forceful personality. His three adult children worked for Ajax and collected a wage: 7 Rita Ajax was business manager and her father’s second-in-command; Sean Ajax ran the spare parts business; and Nat Ajax was a mechanic in the garage. When Manuel passed away in 2018, the children inherited an equal number of his shares in Ajax. They also respected Manuel’s wish that Rita replace him as Managing Director. Initially, Sean and Nat also maintained their customary roles in Ajax’s businesses. However, in June 2021, a conflict erupted between the children, prompting Nat to resign as mechanic with Ajax and seek work elsewhere. Nat has come to you with several complaints about how Ajax is being managed: a) Nat has heard rumours from a business associate that Sean is diverting stock from the spare parts business to another company that he and Rita own. When Nat confronted Rita with these rumours, she told him the allegations were ‘his usual garbage’ and that he was ‘like a baby, too easily led by others’. b) Nat is unhappy that Rita is proposing to sell off Ajax’s garage to fund a substantial investment in personal mobility devices. According to Nat, this investment is contrary to Manuel’s wishes and the purpose for which Ajax was established. c) Nat says that Rita and Sean are discriminating against him by refusing to declare a dividend (now that he doesn’t work for the company, he has no wage from it either), and by not listening to his complaints about Rita’s domineering management style. Advise Nat on any remedies he may pursue to have his concerns addressed, dealing with directors’ duties only as relevant to advising on those remedies and excluding the s236 from your advice (we covered that last week). Tutorial 9: Building on Content from Lectures 10 and 11 (Corporate Disclosure and Finance) Question 1 Do you agree with Brandeis J that sunlight the best disinfectant in the corporate context? Explain your answer with reference to examples discussed in the lectures. Question 2 Palm Tree Coal Mining Ltd (PTCM) is a small, capitalised, professional services company providing staff and consulting services to the booming Queensland mining industry. The directors of PTCM are Max, Alexandra, and Henry, each of whom owns 20 per cent of the shares in PTCM, with the remainder traded over the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX). The directors of PTCM are concerned that their company’s shares seem to be trading at a discount compared to other companies in the mining services industry. They undertake a strategic review of the company’s capital structure called ‘Project Black’, the goal being to increase the share price of PTCM. Project Black involves several key transactions: a) The company will restructure its share capital by splitting its current shares into two classes: Class A voting shares and Class B non-voting convertible preference shares. b) Class A shares will have no dividend rights, with only Class B shares carrying a dividend entitlement (but no voting rights). c) The company will engage in a selective share buy-back to acquire 30 per cent of the company’s listed share capital. This selective buy-back will offer $2 per share for all shares purchased from the company between 2000 and 2005. The only shareholders with shares that qualify for this buy-back are Max, Alexandra and Henry, and a few minor shareholders who hold no more than 10 per cent collectively. This buy-back effectively results in Max, Alexandra and Henry (and the minority shareholders) selling back one-third of their shares to the company for $2 per share. PTCM shares have never traded on the ASX above $1.80 (their current price). 8 d) Max, Alexandra, and Henry plan to use their buy-back payments to acquire Class B shares. The proposed buy-back has been severely criticised by the company’s institutional shareholders and by the media, as unfairly favouring Max, Alexandra, and Henry. However, as they currently hold 60 per cent of the company’s voting shares they have said that they have the power to make this change regardless of what the other shareholders think. You are the company secretary for PTCM and have been asked to prepare a report for the board of directors on the legal issues involved in the implementation of Project Black. Your advice should note relevant provisions of the Corporations Act and what the potential consequences may be for the company and its directors if these provisions are breached. Tutorial 10: Building on content from Lecture 12 (External Administration) Question 1 The main aim of the set of regulations governing companies in financial difficulty is to enable them to trade out of that difficulty: in other words, the name of the game is corporate survival. Discuss. Question 2 Great Escapes Pty Ltd (GEPL) is in the adventure tourism business. Its principal customers are people in their early 20s who want to explore beautiful and rugged locations in South-East Asia. Lola is its Managing Director. Gary is its Chief Financial Officer (CFO). GEPL managed to survive the pandemic through a restructure after a period of voluntary administration. However, since it returned to ordinary business, it has struggled to adjust to the post-pandemic business environment, in which both customers and airlines cancel trips much more readily. GEPL has also struggled to pay the interests on its loans, since they became unfixed late last year. Since February, it has been arrears on the rent of two out of ten of its shop; the landlords are commencing action to recover the premise. In March, GEPL fell behind in its repayments to Big Bank, which is a major secured creditor. Seeing the problems in the company, Gary decided that he should move quickly to make sure that GEPL’s ‘house is in order’ if a liquidator is appointed. In April, he arranges for contracts with the tour business of his best friend, Kel, to be paid in full, and a ‘Going Out in Style’ retirement party for Nancy, the company’s long-serving and much-loved accountant. GEPL pays $100,000 to an event planning company run by Gary’s daughter to organise the event, which includes a waterslide and a bar tab for 300 hundred people all night. Presume GEPL was wound up in insolvency at the start of May. Advise the liquidator.
