LAWS3701 Administrative Law

Study Guide

Topic Two Administrative Law and the Commonwealth Constitution

Introduction to the rule of law

The rule of law, like the separation of powers (between legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government), is an important constitutional ideal that infuses liberal democratic systems of government. But what is the essence of the rule of law? It is that all public power has legal limits, and that government authority should be subject to, and constrained by, law. The rule of law requires a repository of public power to be constrained within legal limits and subject to administrative justice and/or judicial processes to enforce them.

Public authority that is not constrained is arbitrary and illegitimate. As legal philosopher Jeremy Waldron explains:

The rule of law comprises a requirement that people in positions of authority should exercise their power within a constraining framework of public norms. It also includes a requirement that there be general [prospective, clear, consistent, practicable and stable] rules laid down to govern the conduct of ordinary people, rules whose public presence enables people to ﬁgure out what is required of them and what the legal consequences of their actions will be. And the rule of law insists on the role of courts, operating according to recognized standards of due process, and offering an impartial forum in which disputes can be resolved in an even-handed way.

And he continues, “[t]here is a heritage dating back to Aristotle of concern for legality and enthusiasm for the possibility that legal modes of rule may take the edge off human power.”

The Australian legal system operates on the assumed application of the (somewhat nebulous) concept of the rule of law. The rule of law is part of the fabric onto which the written words of the Constitution are superimposed. The phrase, ‘rule of law’, comes from English constitutional law discourse and the concept was described by Professor Dicey as a characteristic and critical feature of governance in England (along with parliamentary supremacy). Dicey’s account [1915] of the rule of law provided, relevantly:

that no person is punishable or can be lawfully made to suffer in body or goods except for a distinct breach of the law established in the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary courts (meaning, regularity as opposed to arbitrariness, or unconfined discretion); and

every person, whatever be their rank or condition, is subject to the ordinary law of the realm and amenable to the jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts (meaning, equal subjection of all, the government as well as the governed, to the law).

Today it is accepted that specialist administrative tribunals (with dedicated staff who have expertise in a field (or fields) of public administration) that operate in a quasi-judicial manner can also be critical for safeguarding and promoting the rule of law.

In Australia, disputes arising between individuals and government about, say, the legality of government officials’ actions, or disputes about whether a tribunal or inferior court (e.g. District Court) has exceeded its power to decide matters, are disputes that are resolved, authoritatively and with finality, by the superior courts (ultimately, the High Court of Australia).

The rule of law requires that the exercise of official (public) power be it: (1) delegated legislative power, (2) administrative action, or (3) judicial power, must be supported by a valid law; statute-based, the common law, or constitutional authority (e.g., the Executive power of the Commonwealth is sourced in s 61 Constitution).

There is no express reference to the rule of law in the Australian Constitution; it is an assumption that informs the constitutional framework. There is judicial recognition that rule of law “is an assumption upon which the Constitution depends for its efficacy. Chapter III of the Constitution which confers and defines judicial power… gives practical effect to that assumption.” So, the rule of law finds constitutional support through s 75(v) Constitution which confers on the High Court of Australia original jurisdiction to entertain challenges to the action of Commonwealth officers and provide a ‘writ’ (meaning, a remedy) in the event that there has been unlawful action taken.

The remedies contained in s 75(v) (mandamus and prohibition) are forms of action historically administered by common law courts of England (Court of King’s Bench). These remedies, along with certiorari, came to be administered by the Colonial Supreme Courts during the nineteenth century. As superior courts of law, the State Supreme Courts were able to uphold the rule of law in much the same way as their judicial counterparts in England, through the writs. Today the Queensland Supreme Court’s superior jurisdiction is reflected in the Constitution of Queensland 2001, s 58.

So, the common law basis for judicial review, inherited from England, is reflected in the Federal and State constitutional frameworks, and through the ‘writs’ the High Court of Australia and Supreme Courts were (and are) able to supervise the exercise of public powers by the executive government and inferior courts. For much of the twentieth century administrative law was common law based, and the application of s 75 Constitution was informed by and took its content from the common law (i.e. judge-made law). This is why judicial review via s 75 Constitution is often referred to as ‘common law-based’ judicial review.

However, administrative law developed in the latter part of the twentieth century, and one (of several) significant reform was the ‘codification’ of judicial review in statute, via the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 (Cth). Comparable legislative reform took place in several other jurisdictions in Australia, including Queensland with the enactment of the Judicial Review Act 1991 (Qld). What this shows is that, in the twenty-first century, judicial review in Australia is piecemeal: the various pieces  constitutional, statutory, and common law  are based on the historic — prerogative writ — jurisdiction of the Court of King’s Bench in England, and the pieces (frustratingly) do not fit neatly together, as we will examine and unpack in later workshops.

In summary, judicial review over government administrative action, delegated legislation and inferior courts embodies the practical application of the rule of law.  Whether, in a given case, its basis is constitutional, as in an application for a remedy (‘constitutional writ’) under s 75(v) of the Constitution against an officer of the Commonwealth, or statutory, as in proceedings under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 (Cth) or JRA 1991 (Qld), or the common law, as in an application to a Supreme Court for a prerogative writ against an administrative official (or inferior court) amenable to such a writ, the essence of what is involved is to compel those invested with public power to exercise such power according to law, and thereby prevent them from exceeding their legal authority.

The first question (for workshop two) requires you to read, comprehend and reflect on the significance of several cases. These cases reveal the importance of s 75(v) Constitution, and what respect for the rule of law requires. Note that you will need to read the case summary at the beginning of the law reports and then the passages in the judges’ reasoning highlighted for you attention.

Separation of powers

The separation of powers provides for a system of checks and balances on the exercise of public powers by the legislature, executive and judicial branches of government. The Australian constitutional framework dictates a separation of powers (Ch I-III Constitution). The separation of functions and agencies is found in ss 1 (legislative power), 61 (executive power) and 71 (judicial power and courts).

There is a much sharper institutional division between the executive and judiciary than there is between the legislative and executive branch. This is due to Australia’s inheritance of the Westminster system, and fusion of the executive and legislative branches of government, as explained in the required reading for this week’s workshop.

The respective functions of the executive and judiciary, and the limits on their respective powers, mandated by the Constitution (as interpreted by the High Court) is evidenced in many cases, three examples will suffice at this stage: (1) Brandy v HREOC; (2) Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration; and (3) Attorney General (NSW) v Quin. These three cases define important aspects judicial and executive power at the Federal level (not State level), and illustrate that the separation of powers has important consequences for the structure and operation of administrative law in Australia.

So, the tripartite separation of powers in Australia imposes limits on the powers of non-judicial bodies at the Commonwealth level. What functions can be conferred on (non-judicial) organs, such as administrative tribunals and agencies at the Commonwealth level? Well, they are strictly precluded from exercising the judicial power of the Commonwealth. Any legislation that purports to invest judicial power of the Commonwealth in a non-judicial organ will be deemed invalid (unconstitutional). This is precisely what occurred in Brandy v HREOC, which concerned an administrative body – the Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission (now the Australian Human Rights Commission) charged with the role of determining claims arising under the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 (Cth) (RDA).

In Brandy’s case HREOC determined a controversy arising between parties, and it did so on the basis of facts and the law set out in the RDA. It decided that there had been a contravention of the RDA and provided a remedy — an award of damages to Mr Bell against Mr Brandy. The High Court stated that these functions and powers were closely analogous to those of a court in deciding criminal or civil cases. The sticking point was that determinations of HREOC were not legally enforceable; first, they had to be registered in the Federal Court, which would then take effect as if it were an Order of the Federal Court. And a feature of judicial power is the power to pronounce judgment and carry that judgment into legally binding effect between the parties.

However, and significantly, the Federal Court did not have to be satisfied itself that a breach of the RDA had occurred before an Order of the Court was made. Rather there was a mechanical process, by operation of the law, by which HREOC’s determinations were registered and then given binding effect and enforced on the parties concerned. The High Court decided that the automatic effect of the registration of the determination was to make the HREOC’s determinations binding, authoritative and enforceable. Consequently, this invalidly invested that administrative body with judicial power, which was contrary to the separation of powers under the Constitution.

There are corresponding constitutional limits on administrative executive agencies (officials) that preclude executive officials from discharging certain functions, including making findings of guilt and imposing punishment on people. That particular function is (almost) exclusively a judicial function entrusted to Ch III courts. The important case of Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration makes this clear in the context of executive detention of non-citizens seeking asylum in Australia.  Migration laws authorised the administrative detention of non-citizens arriving by boat, without a visa, until they were either deported or admitted and granted a protection visa. Seeking asylum (refugee protection) is not (as is commonly assumed) a criminal offence in Australia (indeed it is expressly permitted under international law treaties to which Australia is a party) but arriving without a valid entry visa prohibited under Australian migration law.

In Lim’s case members of the High Court made it clear that there were some functions which, by reason of their nature or historical considerations, were essentially and exclusively judicial in character. Under the Constitution, only Ch. III courts could adjudge and punish criminal guilt, Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ stated:

the involuntary detention of a citizen in custody by the State is penal or punitive in character and, under our system of government, exists only as an incident of the exclusively judicial function of adjudging and punishing criminal guilt. Every citizen is "ruled by the law, and by the law alone" and "may with us be punished for a breach of law, but he can be punished for nothing else" (Dicey, Introduction to the Study of Law of the Constitution (1959) p 202) (emphasis added).

Their Honours continued,

There are some qualifications which must be made to the general proposition that the power to order that a citizen be involuntarily confined in custody is, under the doctrine of the separation of judicial from executive and legislative powers enshrined in our Constitution, part of the judicial power of the Commonwealth entrusted exclusively to Ch. III courts. The most important is … the arrest and detention in custody, pursuant to executive warrant, of a person accused of crime to ensure that he or she is available to be dealt with by the courts.

The involuntary and prolonged detention of ‘aliens’ (non-citizens) was deemed another exception to the general rule that only the judiciary can impose detention on individuals. This was because immigration detention was not considered to be punitive in nature, because it was not, formally, imposed on non-citizens as a punishment. Rather, the HCA decided that it served administrative purposes relating to admission and/or deportation processes. It is striking that the HCA accepted that if a similar legislative scheme of executive (‘administrative’) detention were imposed on citizens such a scheme would breach the separation of powers.

There are also important constitutional limits on judicial power with significant practical consequences for administrative law. Broadly speaking the Federal judiciary (Ch. III courts, those specified in s 71) can only exercise the judicial power of the Commonwealth. Ch. III courts cannot exercise administrative power, other than what is deemed incidental to their judicial powers.  Accordingly a ‘merits review’ function (looking at issues of substantive justice as opposed to questions of law) cannot be conferred upon a Ch. III court as Quin’s case illustrates.

In Quin’s case (an appeal to the High Court from the NSW State Supreme Court) Brennan J outlined important statements of principle about the legitimate constitutional role of the courts, exercising judicial review in Australia (these principles are detailed below). These statements about the separation of judicial and executive power speak to the fundamental distinction drawn between questions of legality and merits that underpin administrative law in Australia. The difference between legality and merits is a recurring theme in administrative law, which we will revisit throughout the course and in particular when we examine precisely what ‘merits review’ means (workshop three) and when we examine the scope and limits of the grounds on which judicial review can be sought (workshops four, five and six).

Quin’s case concerned a disgruntled former stipendiary magistrate who had not been chosen for appointment to the new court system established under the Local Courts Act 1982 (established to replace the old local courts known as Court of Petty Sessions, the lowest court in the judicial hierarchy in NSW). The effect of the Local Courts Act was to destroy the security of tenure enjoyed by stipendiary magistrates. The NSW Government was concerned that Quin was (among five magistrates out of one hundred) unfit for office. In that regard Quin successfully obtained a declaration (a form of remedy) from the NSW Supreme Court that he had been denied ‘procedural fairness’ (a ‘fair hearing’ in this instance). This was because he had not been given a chance to respond to the government’s concerns about his fitness for office before they made their decision not to appoint him.

Subsequently, the NSW Government decided to treat Quin’s application in the same way as all other applicants for appointment to the new court, but his application was considered by the government, on its merits, to be relatively inferior to other applications. Quin claimed that the Attorney General of NSW should only be permitted to determine his application, under the old system of appointments, on its own merits (without reference to, and comparison with, the relative merits of other candidates).

The High Court rejected Quin’s argument. They held that the NSW Attorney General was not obliged to treat the plaintiff’s application in accordance with the (prior) policy pertaining at the time of appointments of the former stipendiary magistrates. In a frequently cited portion of his judgment, Brennan J stated:

Judicial review has undoubtedly been invoked, and invoked beneficially, to set aside administrative acts and decisions which are unjust or otherwise inappropriate, but only when the purported exercise of power is excessive or otherwise unlawful. […] The essential warrant for judicial intervention is the declaration and enforcing of the law affecting the extent and exercise of power: that is the characteristic duty of the judicature as the third branch of government. In Victoria v The Commonwealth and Hayden, Gibbs J said that the duty of the courts extends to pronouncing on the validity of executive action when challenged on the ground that it exceeds constitutional power, but the duty extends to judicial review of administrative action alleged to go beyond the power conferred by statute or by the prerogative or alleged to be otherwise in disconformity with the law. The duty and the jurisdiction of the courts are expressed in the memorable words of Marshall CJ in Marbury v Madison: "It is, emphatically, the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is." The duty and jurisdiction of the court to review administrative action do not go beyond the declaration and enforcing of the law which determines the limits and governs the exercise of the repository's power. If in so doing, the court avoids administrative injustice or error, so be it; but the court has no jurisdiction simply to cure administrative injustice or error. The merits of administrative action, to the extent that they can be distinguished from legality, are for the repository of the relevant power and, subject to political control, for the repository alone. The consequence is that the scope of judicial review must be defined not in terms of the protection of individual interests but in terms of the extent of power and the legality of its exercise.

Brennan J continued,

If it be right to say that the court's jurisdiction in judicial review goes no further than declaring and enforcing the law prescribing the limits and governing the exercise of power, the next question immediately arises: what is the law? And that question, of course, must be answered by the court itself. In giving its answer, the court needs to remember that the judicature is but one of the three coordinate branches of government and that the authority of the judicature is not derived from a superior capacity to balance the interests of the community against the interests of an individual. The repository of administrative power must often balance the interests of the public at large and the interests of minority groups or individuals. The courts are not equipped to evaluate the policy considerations which properly bear on such decisions, nor is the adversary system ideally suited to the doing of administrative justice: interests which are not represented as well as interests which are represented must often be considered. Moreover, if the courts were permitted to review the merits of administrative action whenever interested parties were prepared to risk the costs of litigation, the exercise of administrative power might be skewed in favour of the rich, the powerful, or the simply litigious. Some advocates of judicial intervention would encourage the courts to expand the scope and purpose of judicial review, especially to provide some check on the Executive Government which nowadays exercises enormous powers beyond the capacity of the Parliament to supervise effectively. Such advocacy is misplaced. If the courts were to assume a jurisdiction to review administrative acts or decisions which are "unfair" in the opinion of the court — not the product of procedural unfairness, but unfair on the merits — the courts would be assuming a jurisdiction to do the very thing which is to be done by the repository of an administrative power, namely, choosing among the courses of action upon which reasonable minds might differ […] The absence of adequate machinery, such as an Administrative Appeals Tribunal, to review the merits of administrative acts and decisions may be lamented in the jurisdictions where the legislature has failed to provide it, but the default cannot be made good by expanding the function of the courts.

So, as Brennan J makes clear, the purpose of judicial review over administrative action is limited to ensuring executive decisions were taken within legal limits, to checking decision-making to prevent decision-makers exceeding and abusing their public powers which may be derived from statute, constitution (prerogative/executive power) or common law.

In the extract above, judicial review is contrasted with ‘merits review’, the latter is concerned with the substantive fairness (‘merits’) of a decision, not merely with the procedural fairness and legality of the process by which the decision was reached. Brennan J references the Administrative Appeals Tribunal — which, until 2024, was the peak Commonwealth tribunal (it has been replaced by the Administrative Review Tribunal) — that engaged in merits review. That reference provides a neat segue into next week’s workshop, where we will examine the function, powers and procedures of the Administrative Review Tribunal, and the important concept of ‘merits review’.

Workshop two: Administrative Law in Constitutional Context

Required reading: Hon Stephen Gageler, “The Constitutional Dimension” in M Groves, Modern Administrative Law in Australia: Concepts and Context (2014, CUP) go here for access to this chapter which helpfully discusses several of the cases listed for you to read before workshop two.

The required reading will take approximately two hours to complete, the reading of the cases cited in the questions and the drafting of detailed case notes will take around four hours if done adequately.

Further reading: J Waldron, “The rule of law in public law” in M Elliott and D Feldman (eds), The Cambridge Companion to Public Law (2015 CUP).

The Rule of Law and Access to Justice

(1) Foundation for judicial review: the Commonwealth Constitution has few provisions of direct relevance for administrative lawyers: sections 73 and 75 are notable exceptions to that proposition. What are those provisions concerned with and what is the significance of s 73(ii), s 75(iii) and s 75(v)? [Refer to Gageler’s article for assistance].

(2) Further to question one, identify a statute that confers a supervisory (judicial review) jurisdiction (comparable to the High Court’s original jurisdiction under s 75(v) Constitution) upon the Federal Court of Australia and Federal Circuit & Family Court (note: there is more than one statute, but which statute is most relevant for judicial review over administrative action?).

(3) Refer to Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin, and also your reading of Gageler’s article, and consider the relationship between the rule of law and judicial review over administrative action by government officials. Relatedly, what are the limits on judicial (review) powers under the Constitution?

(4) Judgments in the High Court of Australia contain frequent assertions about the importance of the rule of law, and the practical conclusions said to be mandated by the principle of the rule of law. Carefully read the headnotes (the one-to-two-page case summary at the start of reported cases) of the following three cases detailed below, and then carefully write/type up a case-note on each one in turn.

The case note should be structured under three headings dealing with facts, issues and decision: it should contain a brief summary of the facts (no more than a paragraph) distilled from your reading of the headnote, the claim involved in the case (that is, the key legal issue(s) before the court), a summary of the court’s decision, and a summary of the relevant judgment(s) with careful (pinpoint) reference to the judges’ reasoning. We have directed you to relevant parts of the judgments for the purpose of this exercise, so you do not need to read the entire case.

Establishing legal authority to take administrative action: Church of Scientology v Woodward (1982) 154 CLR 25 (read the judgments of Mason and Brennan JJ).

Was ASIO subject to judicial review? And was there a statutory foundation enabling ASIO to investigate the affairs of the church?

Establishing legal authority to take administrative action: CPCF v Minister for Immigration (2015) 255 CLR 514.

Most administrative law cases are about statutory power: whether legislation authorised government actions, and the construction of the statute to determine the outer limits upon government power. But not all administrative power is sourced in statute: importantly s 61 of the Constitution supplies non-statutory executive power (similar to ‘prerogative powers’ at common law). A controversial case in which the Australian government relied on both statutory and non-statutory powers to validate its coercive action taken against asylum seekers at sea is CPCF.

In light of your reading of CPCF, did the Maritime Powers Act 2013 (Cth) authorise the decision to; first, detain at sea, and secondly, take asylum seekers towards India? And, if not, did non-statutory executive power (or, ‘prerogative power’) supply an alternative basis for the Australian Government’s coercive actions?

Note the second question was answered by only four members of the Court ([476]-[494], Keane J (majority), with Hayne and Bell JJ, [137]-[151] and Kiefel J, [258]-[286] (dissenting)).

Access to justice before the High Court of Australia: Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth (2002) 211 CLR 476

The approach of the HCA to privative clauses (‘ouster clauses’) demonstrates that the judiciary are suspicious about legislative attempts to restrict a person’s ability to challenge the legality of government action before the courts, as evidenced by Plaintiff S157/2002.

Plaintiff S157 is, arguably, one of the most significant contemporary decisions of the HCA. It concerned an attempt by the Federal Legislature to ‘oust’ the capacity of the High Court to review government action and use its remedial powers under s 75, vis-à-vis a ‘Commonwealth officer’.

What did the High Court decide in respect of Parliament’s attempt to curtail the High Court’s supervisory function under s 75(v) Constitution? And what role did the ‘rule of law’ play in the reasoning of Chief Justice Gleeson (read carefully pages 482-494 of Plaintiff S157)?

Note: We will return to reconsider Plaintiff S157 later in the course, in relation to the concept and meaning of ‘jurisdictional error’ and ‘ouster clauses’; at this early stage in the course, we are primarily concerned with the High Court’s statements of principle about the ‘rule of law’ and access to justice.

END.