LAWS3701 Administrative Law

Study Guide

Topic Eight

ACCESS TO JUSTICE (2): STANDING REQUIREMENTS

“‘Standing’ is a metaphor to describe the interest required, apart from a cause of action as understood at common law, to obtain various common law, equitable and constitutional remedies.”

[Allan v Transurban City Link Ltd (2001) 208 CLR 167

(Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow, Hayne, and Callinan JJ at [15])]

What is standing?

One has legal standing when one’s connection with a particular dispute is sufficient to entitle one to bring a legal action in respect of that dispute. A party who has standing is entitled to bring the action; a party that lacks standing is not so entitled.

A recurrent metaphor that is invoked in discussions of standing is a spatial one: a party will enjoy standing when they stand in close proximity to the relevant legal contest. That is, they possess standing if there exists a sufficiently close connection between the party’s interests and the subject matter of the dispute.

In Re McHattan and Collector of Customs (NSW) (1977) 1 ALD 67, an Administrative Appeals Tribunal decision involving an analysis of the test for standing before the AAT that was found in s 27(1) of the AAT Act, Brennan J extended the metaphor as follows:

[A] decision which affects the interests of one person directly may affect the interests of others indirectly. Across the pool of sundry interests, the ripples of affection may widely extend. The problem which is inherent in the language of the statute is the determination of the point beyond which the affection of interests by a decision should be regarded as too remote for the purposes of subs 27(1).

The function of standing requirements

Standing tests therefore serve as a sort of filter. They narrow the range of proceedings that will come before the courts (or before tribunals) by disallowing those with no interest in the relevant dispute, as well as those whose interests are affected by the dispute in too remote a manner, from having their complaint heard.  “… [T]he established requirements as to standing ensure that the exercise of judicial power is informed, as fully as possible, by the ‘concrete adverseness which sharpens the presentation of issues’ …” - Kuczborski v Queensland (2014) 254 CLR 51, [186], per Crennan, Kiefel, Gageler and Keane JJ.

Standing versus ‘cause of action’

The law of standing has been greatly impacted by a longstanding attempt by the courts to distinguish between private law—understood as concerning the vindication of private rights—and public law—understood to involve the protection of public interests (see for example the judgment of McHugh J in *Bateman’s Bay Local Aboriginal Land Council v Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund Pty Ltd (1998) 194 CLR 247 at 275-278; see also Lord Wilberforce in Gouriet v Union of Post Office Workers [1978] AC 435 at 484). Within private law, for example, we speak of my having a cause of action in tort when I suffer foreseeable injury caused by your failure to discharge the duty of care that you owed to me. In this way, a standing requirement is generally ‘baked in’ to the articulation of a cause of action. That is, given our understanding of what it is to have a cause of action for negligence, there is an implicit requirement that only the party injured by the breach of the duty of care can bring a suit for damages. As a result, issues of standing are in general considerably less common and less controversial within the sphere of private law, as compared to public law.

Standing as a rare but important issue in public law

Even within the realm of public law, it must be said, that standing “does not often present the courts with problems” - M Aronson, M Groves and G Weeks, Judicial Review of Administrative Action and Government Liability (7th ed, Thomson Reuters, 2022) at 837; see also R Douglas, “Uses of Standing Rules 1980-2006” (2006) 14 AJ Admin L 22, who asserts at 34 that standing is a significant issue in only two or three cases per year, on average. The amount of critical attention that standing issues attracts from academics, law reform commissions, and other commentators is clearly out of proportion with the frequency with which questions of standing occupy the energy of courts and tribunals in real-world proceedings. The reasons for this have to do with the fact that (as we will discuss in greater detail below) the question of whether tests for standing in public law matters should be stringent or relaxed—or done away with altogether—implicates a wide range of public policy concerns.

Another reason standing cases attract a degree of attention that is disproportionate with their frequency is that the importance of standing cases is often disproportionate to their frequency as well. For example, they often ‘involve interests shared by large numbers of people other than the plaintiff’ (Douglas, “Use of Standing Rules” at 34). Further, standing decisions play, obviously, a critical role in determining who can challenge exercises of public power—and thus have potentially profound ramifications when it comes to ensuring government accountability and upholding the rule of law.

‘No single criterion’ for standing

There is no single test of standing that applies across-the-board in public law matters (see for example *Bateman’s Bay at 263 and 279-280). Rather, approaches to standing vary according to the type of remedy that is being sought. On this issue, see the decision of Gummow J in Truth About Motorways Pty Ltd v Macquarie Infrastructure Investment Management Ltd (2000) 200 CLR 591, who observed at [99] that “… in matters of what now would be called public law there was [at the time of the adoption of the Commonwealth Constitution] no single criterion as to the need for, or the content of, a standing requirement.”

We will therefore look, in order, at the tests for standing in respect of: declarations and injunctions; orders for review pursuant to the Commonwealth ADJR Act and the Queensland JR Act; and merits review at the ART. Standing for the writs of mandamus, certiorari, prohibition, and habeas corpus will be discussed in a subsequent class.

1.	THE TEST FOR STANDING FOR DECLARATIONS AND INJUNCTIONS

The role of the Attorney General

As noted, an attempt to divide public and private law has informed tests for standing in public law disputes. The distinction turns on who is taken to be the right/interest-holder. In private law disputes, courts take action to vindicate the legal rights enjoyed by private parties—natural persons, corporate entities, and other identifiable groups. In contrast, some rights are understood to be conferred on the public at large. In these latter cases, a party may seek to challenge an exercise of public power that they regard as violating the public right. Such actions to vindicate public rights—or which are perhaps better understood as attempts to advance the public interest, or to ensure the performance of a public duty—have historically been regarded as the purview of the Attorney General. That is, whereas actions to vindicate private rights are properly initiated by the private party holding the relevant right, actions to vindicate public rights are properly commenced by the Attorney General, with private citizens generally lacking the standing required to bring such an action.

The Attorney General, in performing the role of protector of public rights, may initiate proceedings to advance the public interest in either of two ways. First, the Attorney General may commence proceedings ex officio—meaning on his or her own motion. Secondly, the Attorney General may assent to a ‘relator action’. A relator action involves an individual or organisation asking for the Attorney General’s permission for an action to be brought in the Attorney General’s name—in a sense piggy-backing on the unquestioned standing of the Attorney General. Where the Attorney General approves of the request—and is therefore said to grant his or her ‘fiat’—the individual or group granted the fiat has standing to initiate judicial review proceedings as a party to the case and becomes liable for costs. In addition, the Attorney General remains ultimately in control of the litigation, and retains the right to decide to bring it to an end.

The Attorney General may turn down requests to launch a relator action. Such decisions on the part of the Attorney General are not reviewable. At the Queensland level, however, s10 of the Attorney-General Act 1999 (Qld) provides that where a fiat is refused, the Attorney General must submit a report, to be tabled in parliament, explaining the reasons for the refusal.

Boyce v Paddington

There are two exceptions to the rule that it is for the Attorney General to commence proceedings to vindicate public rights through the granting of declarations or injunctions. In Boyce v Paddington Borough Council [1903] 1 Ch 109 at 114, it was said that:

A plaintiff can sue without joining the Attorney-General in two cases: first, where the interference with the public right is such as that some private right of his is at the same time interfered with …; and, secondly, where no private right is interfered with, but the plaintiff, in respect of his public right, suffers special damage peculiar to himself from the interference with the public right.

The second exception from Boyce has been modified in Australia by subsequent judicial treatment. In particular, the ‘special damage’ criterion it contemplates was recast by Gibbs J in the leading decision relating to standing for declarations and injunctions in public law: *Australian Conservation Foundation v Commonwealth (1980) 146 CLR 493.

ACF v Commonwealth

The case involved a proposal by a private company (Iwasaki) to develop land near Yeppoon in order to create a tourist resort. The Australian Conservation Foundation (ACF) claimed that in considering Iwasaki’s proposal, the Commonwealth had failed to comply with certain provisions of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974 (Cth) (EPIP Act). The ACF therefore sought relief before the High Court in the form of declarations and an injunction. Specifically, the ACF asked the High Court to direct the Commonwealth to ensure that the EPIP Act was complied with, and invited the court to issue an injunction restraining the Commonwealth from acting on a decision to permit the development.

The High Court found that the ACF lacked standing to bring their claim. In dealing with the question of the ACF’s standing, Gibbs J, with whom Mason J agreed, recast the ‘special damage’ test of Boyce. According to Gibbs J, the language of Boyce, referring as it does to “special damage” “peculiar to oneself” is “apt to be misleading” (527). Gibbs J was obviously concerned that the special damage test as articulated in Boyce could be interpreted too restrictively. To forestall that possibility, Gibbs J in ACF v Commonwealth explained that “‘special damage’ cannot be limited to actual pecuniary loss, and the words ‘peculiar to himself’ do not mean that the plaintiff, and no one else, must have suffered damage.”(527) According to Gibbs J, “the expression ‘special damage peculiar to himself’ … should be regarded as equivalent in meaning to ‘having a special interest in the subject matter of the action’” (527).

Gibbs J noted at the outset that the EPIP Act provisions invoked by the ACF did not confer on the ACF any private rights. Thus the first of the two exceptions carved out by Boyce to the general rule that it is for the Attorney General alone to vindicate public rights could not be made out. The question before the court, of course, then became whether the ACF had standing under the revised “special interest” test. As noted, the court found in the negative. In doing so, it articulated several legal propositions that are crucial to understanding the evolution of standing law since the time of the decision.

First, Gibbs J made clear (at 526) that the special interest test requires that an applicant possess an interest in the subject matter of the action that is greater than that of an ordinary person:

It is quite clear that an ordinary member of the public, who has no interest other than that which any member of the public has in upholding the law, has no standing to sue to prevent the violation of a public right or to enforce the performance of a public duty. … A private citizen who has no special interest is incapable of bringing proceedings [to prevent a public wrong] unless, of course, he is permitted by statute to do so.

In language that is repeated throughout subsequent decisions on standing in public interest disputes, Gibbs J wrote that the special interest required for standing must be more than “a mere intellectual or emotional concern” (530). Gibbs J continued (at 530-531):

A person is not interested within the meaning of the rule, unless he is likely to gain some advantage, other than the satisfaction of righting a wrong, upholding a principle or winning a contest, if his action succeeds or to suffer some disadvantage, other than a sense of grievance or a debt for costs, if his action fails. A belief, however strongly felt, that the law generally, or a particular law, should be observed, or that conduct of a particular kind should be prevented, does not suffice to give its possessor locus standi. If that were not so, the rule requiring special interest would be meaningless. Any plaintiff who felt strongly enough to bring an action could maintain it.

Applying this test, the majority held that the ACF had “no special interest in the preservation of the environment” in the area that was to become the resort. They specifically rejected the argument that the ACF had a special interest in light of the fact that it was a body incorporated with the object of conserving the environment. According to Gibbs J, “[t]he fact that the Foundation is incorporated with particular objects does not strengthen its claim to standing. A natural person does not acquire standing simply by reason of the fact that he holds certain beliefs and wishes to translate them into action, and a body corporate formed to advance the same beliefs is in no stronger position.  If it is the fact that some members of the Foundation have a special interest … it would not follow that the Foundation has locus standi, for a corporation does not acquire standing because some of its members possess it” (531; on this issue see also Access For All Alliance (Hervey Bay) Inc v Hervey Bay City Council (2007) 162 FCR 313 at [47]-[51]). (It is not clear that the High Court would remain unwilling to lift the corporate veil today if the issue again came before it.)

The “special interest” criterion remains the key test for standing when seeking declarations or injunctions in public interest cases. It has proved, however, difficult to apply, with many critics alleging that the case law in this area is rife with inconsistencies (see for example EC Fisher and J Kirk, ‘Still Standing: An Argument for Open Standing in Australia and England’ (1997) 71 Australian Law Journal 370).

Onus v Alcoa

Shortly after the first ACF decision, the High Court again heard a landmark standing case: *Onus v Alcoa of Australia Ltd (1981) 149 CLR 27. Onus related to an action to prevent Alcoa—a private company—from breaking the criminal law in Victoria. The plaintiffs, members of the Gournditch-jmara Aboriginal people, sought to ensure the enforcement of the Archaeological and Aboriginal Relics Preservation Act 1972 (Vic), which made it an offence to damage or endanger an Aboriginal relic. The plaintiffs alleged that Alcoa’s construction of an aluminium smelter near Portland, Victoria, would have precisely that effect, and so would violate the Act. They therefore applied for declaratory and injunctive relief.

The plaintiffs argued that they had standing to sue on the basis of the fact that the Act conferred private rights to the protection of Aboriginal relics upon individual Aboriginal persons. Gibbs CJ rejected this argument. Gibbs CJ found instead that “the Act was passed for the benefit of the public at large” (at 35), and that as such it was “quite impossible to hold that the Act confers any private rights on aborigines or any class of them” (at 35).

The plaintiffs further contended that in any event they had a special interest in the subject matter of the action, pursuant to the special interest test laid out in ACF v Commonwealth. Here the applicants were successful.

Gibbs CJ specifically sought to distinguish the case from ACF. In his view, Onus was “not a case in which a plaintiff sues in an attempt to give effect to his beliefs or opinions on a matter which does not affect him except insofar as he holds beliefs or opinions about it” (37). Rather, the plaintiffs were found to be “the custodians of the relics according to the laws and customs of [their] people” (36). It was further held that they used the relics to teach younger members of the community about their culture and history. As such, it was found that the relics held significant cultural and spiritual relevance for the plaintiffs. In an effort to justify his finding on standing in light of the ACF decision, Gibbs CJ remarked (at 37) that:

The position of a small community of aboriginal people of a particular group living in a particular area which that group has traditionally occupied, and which claims an interest in relics of their ancestors found in that area, is very different indeed from that of a diverse group of white Australians associated by some common opinion on a matter of social policy which might equally concern any other Australian.

The other members of the High Court each delivered a judgment agreeing with Gibbs CJ on the issue of standing, and for substantially the same reasons. The judgments of Stephen and Brennan JJ are particularly important. Stephen J, too, sought to distinguish Onus from ACF. In doing so, he asserted that “the distinction between this case and the ACF Case is not to be found in any ready rule of thumb, capable of mechanical application; the criterion of ‘special interest’ supplies no such rule” (42). Instead, Stephen J explained, the question of standing is to be answered in light of the particular circumstances of the case at hand. The enquiry, he wrote, “seems … to involve in each case a curial assessment of the importance of the concern which a plaintiff has with particular subject matter and of the closeness of that plaintiff’s relationship to that subject matter” (42). This seems in line with the statement of Gibbs CJ in Onus that “the question what is a sufficient interest will vary according to the nature of the subject matter of the litigation” (36).

Stephen J also noted that “the importance of the relics to the appellants and their intimate relationship to the relics … [was] different in degree, both in terms of weight and, in particular, in terms of proximity, from that concern which a body of conservationists, however sincere, feels for the environment and its protection” (42). Importantly, Stephen J insisted that “community values” are to be taken into account in determining whether an applicant has a special interest in the subject matter of the action: “Courts necessarily reflect community values and beliefs, according greater weight to, and perceiving a closer proximity to a plaintiff in a case of, some subject matters than others” (42).

Brennan J’s judgment is also important for the way it describes the extent to which a party’s interest will need to be “special” in order to establish standing. According to Brennan J, “[a] plaintiff must show that he has been specially affected, that is, in comparison with the public at large he has been affected to a substantially greater degree or in a significantly different manner. It is not necessary to show that the plaintiff is uniquely affected” (74). (On this last point, see also the judgment of Kenny and Robertson JJ in Animals’ Angels v Secretary, Department of Agriculture (2014) 228 FCR 35 at [121]: “standing requires a sufficient interest, not one which is a unique interest or the strongest interest compared with others who may have an interest”. See as well the decision in the English case of Dyson v Attorney General [1911] 1 KB 410, where standing was granted to challenge a tax decision by a plaintiff who was one of eight million taxpayers affected by the decision.)

Proceeding chronologically, the next few leading cases that are relevant to the law of standing when it comes to challenging administrative action involve judicial interpretation of the Commonwealth ADJR Act. For reasons that will become clear below, we should pause here to carefully outline the legal requirements for standing under the ADJR Act, and under Queensland’s JR Act.

2.	Standing under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 (Cth), and the Judicial Review Act 1991 (Qld)

The Commonwealth ADJR Act lays out in s 5(1) that: “A person who is aggrieved by a decision to which this Act applies … may apply to the Federal Court or the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia for an order of review in respect of the decision … .” (This same language of ‘person aggrieved’ is replicated in respect of conduct (in s 6(1) of the Act), and in respect of a failure to decide (in s 7(1)).)

Who then counts as an “aggrieved” person? Here we must look to the “Interpretation” section of the ADJR Act, s 3. There we are told, in s 3(4)(a), that:

… a reference to a person aggrieved by a decision includes a reference:

to a person whose interests are adversely affected by the decision … .

(Note: ADJR Act s 3(4)(b) provides essentially the same definition in respect of “conduct” that s 3(4)(a) lays down in respect of “decision”.)

At the Queensland level, the JR Act replicates the federal Act’s standing formula. That is, the JR Act provides, in ss 20-22, that a person who is aggrieved by, respectively, a decision, conduct, or the failure to make a decision to which the Act applies, is entitled to apply to the court for a statutory order of review (under Part 3 of the JR Act). The reference to “aggrieved” as it appears in these sections is declared in s 7, in identical fashion to the Commonwealth statute, as “including a reference … to a person whose interests are adversely affected” by the decision/conduct/failure to decide. (Section 44 of the JR Act provides that a person is entitled to apply for an order in the nature of the prerogative writs or a declaration or injunction (under Part 5 of the JR Act) if “the person’s interests are, or would be, adversely affected in or by the matter to which the application relates”.)

How does the “person aggrieved/interests adversely affected” test for standing under the judicial review statutes relate to the “special interest” test for standing for the equitable remedies of declarations and injunctions? Until the recent case of *Argos Pty Ltd v Corbell, Minister for the Environment and Sustainable Development (2014) 254 CLR 394, there was substantial uncertainty on this point. Important judicial pronouncements on how to interpret the tests for standing under the statutes include Broadbridge v Stammers (1987) 16 FCR 296 at 298; Tooheys Ltd v Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (1981) 36 ALR 64; Australian Institute of Marine and Power Engineers v Secretary, Department of Transport (1986) 13 FCR 124; Health World Ltd v Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd (2010) 240 CLR 590.

In Tooheys, Ellicott J (at 79) found that the ADJR Act standing test should not be given a restrictive interpretation:

The words “a person who is aggrieved” should not in my view be given a narrow construction. They should not, therefore, be confined to persons who can establish that they have a legal interest at stake in the making of the decision. It is unnecessary and undesirable to discuss the full import of the phrase. I am satisfied from the broad nature of the discretions which are subject to review and from the fact that the procedures are clearly intended in part to be a substitution for the more complex prerogative writ procedures that a narrow meaning was not intended. This doesn't mean that any member of the public can seek an order of review. I am satisfied however that it at least covers a person who can show a grievance which will be suffered as a result of the decision complained of beyond that which he or she has as an ordinary member of the public. In many cases that grievance will be shown because the decision directly affects his or her existing or future legal rights. In some cases however the effect may be less direct. It may affect him or her in the conduct of a business or may, as I think is the case here, affect his or her rights against third parties.

Gummow J (then on the Federal Court) came to a similar conclusion, and via a similar mode of reasoning, in the case of Australian Institute of Marine and Power Engineers v Secretary, Department of Transport (1987) 13 FCR 124, at 132-133:

… there is a measure of broad agreement as to locus standi both for legal and equitable remedies in public law and in that situation it would be a strange result if the ADJR Act posited, by use of the concept of grievance, some narrower criterion. It also has to be borne in mind that the ADJR Act is ambulatory in its operation and draws within its scope a diverse and extensive collection of decision-making processes, truly an unclosed class. Too rigid a criterion of locus standi will threaten to stultify the utility of the procedures the ADJR Act offers.

Gummow J, in Marine Engineers, also noted that the language of “a person aggrieved” appears in a number of different statutes (131). In his opinion, wherever such language is found, “the content of the expression is to be seen in the light of the scope and purpose of the statute in issue and, given the diversity of statutory provisions, no general proposition is to be established from these examples” (131). Such was the finding of French CJ, Gummow, Heydon, and Bell JJ in Health World Ltd v Shin-Sun as well, who wrote (at 597) that “the meaning of a general expression like ‘aggrieved’ will depend on an examination of the language of the particular statute in which it appears. That examination will reveal the subject, scope and purpose of the statute, and the meaning of ‘aggrieved’ may vary as the subject, scope and purpose varies.”

Argos v Corbell

In the important ADJR Act case of *Argos Pty Ltd v Corbell, Minister for the Environment and Sustainable Development (2014) 254 CLR 394, at [48], French CJ and Keane J offered the following comments in relation to the “person aggrieved” standard:

It must be borne in mind that the ADJR Act is intended to facilitate judicial review of administrative decisions made under a wide range of statutes and having a wide range of practical effects upon members of the community. The availability of judicial review serves to promote the rule of law and to improve the quality of administrative decision-making as well as vindicating the interests of persons affected in a practical way by administrative decision-making. Accordingly, the scope of [the definition of “person aggrieved” in] … the ADJR Act should not be artificially narrowed by glosses upon its broad language.

Argos’s relevance to standing law is not confined, however, to this finding about the importance of avoiding a narrow and technical construction of “person aggrieved”. Of great import is the explicit statement in the judgment of French CJ and Keane J, at [33], that “[s]tanding to challenge a decision under the ADJR Act is determined by [the statutory definition of ‘person aggrieved’ in] the Act; but the authorities which address the question of standing under the general law afford some assistance in understanding the kinds of interest which may be relevant and the kinds of effect that may be regarded as adverse.” (See also [60]-[61] (Hayne and Bell JJ).) Prior to this decision, there was considerable uncertainty about whether there was any relevant difference between the test for standing for declarations and injunctions at common law—the “special interest” test—and the test for standing under the ADJR Act (and Queensland’s JR Act)—namely, the “person aggrieved” test.

It was clear that the courts were turning to the standing requirements for declarations and injunctions when dealing with issues of standing under the judicial review statutes (See, for example, Lockhart J in Right to Life Association (NSW) Inc v Secretary, Department of Human Services and Health (1995) 56 FCR 50 at 67; *Australian Conservation Foundation v Minister for Resources (1989) 19 ALD 70 at 72. See also the Queensland Supreme Court decisions of Re Boe and the Criminal Justice Commission (1993) 1 QAR 167 (at 170) and *Friends of Castle Hill Association Inc v Queensland Heritage Council (1993) 81 LGERA 346 (at 349).)  However, the High Court in Allan v Transurban City Link Ltd (2001) 208 CLR 167 (at [15]-[16] and [53]-[56]) had cautioned that the cases pertaining to standing for equitable remedies were not necessarily dispositive of questions of standing to seek statutory remedies.

Post-Argos, however, the best view is that the test for standing for the equitable remedies and the test for standing under the judicial review statutes have converged, and are effectively the same. Aronson, Groves, and Weeks assert in their influential textbook that even having regard to the relevant case law decided before Argos, “[t]he language of all the [ADJR Act standing] cases… is in substance indistinguishable from the High Court’s special interest test” (902) (see also Animals’ Angels at [121]). In the Queensland context, Aronson, Groves and Weeks assert that the decisions of the Queensland Supreme Court in cases such as *Friends of Castle Hill (at 353); North Queensland Conservation Council Inc v Executive Director, Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service (2000) 5 QAR 196 and Australian Society of Ophthalmologists v Optometry Board of Australia [2013] QSC 350 have “made clear that there is no real difference between the standing tests under the Judicial Review Act 1991 … or the equitable remedies” (905).

A liberalising trend

1989 saw another important case involving the standing of the ACF to challenge a decision on the grounds that it threatened to cause environmental damage: ACF v Minister for Resources (1989) 19 ALD 70. This time the ACF was found, by the Federal Court, to have standing to sue. Then five years later in 1994, the Federal Court delivered another judgment that granted standing to an environmental body—this time one with a regional, as opposed to national focus. That case, *North Coast Environmental Council Inc v Minister for Resources (1994) 55 FCR 492, stands as perhaps the exemplar of what seems to be a general trend of liberalisation in the standing decisions of the Federal Court in the post-ACF v Commonwealth period.

Can the second ACF case and the North Coast decision be reconciled with ACF v Commonwealth? Sackville J, delivering his judgment in North Coast, denied any inconsistency between the two ACF cases. According to Sackville J, the community values that Stephen J spoke of in his judgment in Onus had changed over the nearly ten years that passed between the two ACF decisions. The Australia community, by the time of ACF v Minister for Resources, now more greatly valued having an organisation such as the ACF actively working to ensure the conservation of the environment. Such was the view of Davies J in the second ACF case, who said (at [18]) that “the community at the present time expect that there will be a body such as the A.C.F. to concern itself with this particular issue [ie, forest conservation] and expects the A.C.F. to act in the public interest to put forward a conservation viewpoint as a counter to the viewpoint of economic exploitation.” Consequently, their claim to standing was, all else being equal, stronger than it had been at the time the first ACF case was decided.

A liberal approach to standing like that which won the day in the second ACF case and in North Coast is also clearly evident in the approach adopted by Chesterman J in North Queensland Conservation Council Inc v Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service (2000) 5 QAR 196 at 203. In North Queensland, Chesterman J wrote that in determining whether an environmental body has standing under the JR Act, the court should ask “whether [the environmental body’s] concern with the litigation is such that its application is not an abuse of process. This in turn involves an enquiry into the nature of the legal proceedings, the nature and extent of [the body’s] interest in those proceedings and their outcome, and whether any person will be put to expense or inconvenience as a result of the proceedings” [34]. This apparently very liberal test for standing was, however, met with criticism by Crispin J of the ACT Supreme Court in Save the Ridge Inc v Australian Capital Territory (2004) 182 FLR 155 (see 160-161). Additional cases where judges have adopted narrower positions on standing are *Friends of Castle Hill v Queensland Heritage Council (1993) 81 LGERA 346; *Right to Life Association (NSW) Inc v Secretary, Department of Human Services and Health (1995) 56 FCR 50; and *Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v The Minister for Natural Resources and Mines [2019] 1 QdR 1 and Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v Chief Executive under the Environmental Protection Act 1994 [2018] QSC 22.

The liberal approach to standing preferred by Chesterman J in North Queensland shares much in common with the approach to standing recommended, in obiter, in the joint judgment of Gaudron, Gummow, and Kirby JJ in *Bateman’s Bay Local Aboriginal Land Council v Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund Pty Ltd (1998) 194 CLR 247.

Bateman’s Bay

The applicants in this case were seeking an injunction to restrain a statutory body from establishing a funeral contribution fund. The applicants, who were already in the business of running a funeral contribution fund, alleged that the establishment of the second fund by the statutory body would be contrary to the Funeral Funds Act 1979 (NSW). As the New South Wales Attorney General had refused to grant the applicants his fiat for a relator action, the question for the court was whether the applicants had standing to bring the action.

The High Court found that the applicants had standing, as the establishment of the rival fund was highly likely to detrimentally affect the financial success of their own fund. This probable impact on a financial interest was found to be sufficient to meet the special interest test.

The case is particularly important, however, for the obiter comments of Gaudron, Gummow, and Kirby JJ. Their Honours said, of the special interest test, that “[r]easons of history and the exigencies of present times indicate that this criterion is to be construed as an enabling, not a restrictive, procedural stipulation” ([50]). Moreover, Gaudron, Gummow, and Kirby JJ (at [39]) suggested that:

In a case where the plaintiff has not sought or has been refused the Attorney-General’s fiat, it may well be appropriate to dispose of any question of standing to seek injunctive or other equitable relief by asking whether the proceedings should be dismissed because the right or interest of the plaintiff was insufficient to support a justiciable controversy, or should be stayed as otherwise oppressive, vexatious or an abuse of process. The plaintiff would be at peril of an adverse costs order if the action failed.  A suit might properly be mounted in this way, but equitable relief denied on discretionary grounds. Further, declaratory rather than injunctive relief may be sufficient.

Three aspects of this passage are worth noting. First, the judges are advocating for what would appear to be a significant liberalisation of the test for standing for equitable remedies. Provided the applicant’s action involves a justiciable controversy and is not oppressive, vexatious, or an abuse of process, then the applicant will have standing. Secondly, their Honours draw attention to the fact that even if this broad test for standing were applied, the fact that plaintiffs would remain at risk of having costs awarded against them should their action fail can be expected to deter many would-be applicants from launching questionable legal challenges to administrative action. Thirdly, the passage highlights the fact that the courts provide equitable relief at their discretion—meaning that such relief may always be declined on discretionary grounds even where the formal requirements for standing have been met.

The joint judgment of Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ is also relevant for the way in which the judges expressed considerable scepticism that the Attorney General could be relied upon to zealously guard the public interest through relator actions or actions initiated ex officio. Their Honours noted that whereas in the UK the Attorney General maintains some independence from the Government, in Australia today Attorneys General are typically the heads of large departments and carry out their functions very much as part of, rather than separate and apart from, the government of the day. As such, their Honours drily observed (at [38]):

At the present day, it may be “somewhat visionary” for citizens in this country to suppose that they may rely upon the grant of the Attorney-General’s fiat for protection against ultra vires action of statutory bodies for the administration of which a ministerial colleague is responsible.

While decisions such as those in ACF v Minister, North Coast, and North Queensland are indicative of a general trend of increasing liberalisation of the test for standing—for both equitable and statutory remedies—it remains to be seen whether the courts will move towards adopting the approach advocated by Gaudron, Gummow, and Kirby JJ in Bateman’s Bay.

There have also been, however, some important cases which run counter to this general trend. More restrictive approaches to standing, for instance, were employed in Right to Life Association (NSW) Inc v Secretary, Department of Human Services and Health (1995) 56 FCR 50, as well as *Friends of Castle Hill. In the first case, the applicant anti-abortion association was denied standing to challenge the decision of the Secretary of the Department of Human Services and Health not to stop the clinical trial of an abortion drug. Friends of Castle Hill involved a local environmental body of 367 members, whose prime object was the protection of Castle Hill in Townsville. Dowsett J held that the association lacked standing to challenge Heritage Council decisions which allowed the development of a site on Castle Hill to proceed.

Types of Interests that may constitute a ‘Special Interest’

As noted, issues of standing may arise where the applicant cannot point to a private right that is at stake. Even here, standing is straightforwardly satisfied in most administrative law cases, as the applicant will possess a personal interest that is directly imperilled by the impugned decision (eg, a financial interest in one’s pension not being revoked).

By contrast, when it comes to the “special interest” that courts are searching for in public interest cases, the words of Brennan J, writing in agreement with Gibbs CJ in Onus, are instructive: “A special interest in the subject matter of an action being neither a legal nor equitable right, nor a proprietary or pecuniary interest, will ordinarily be found to arise from modern legislation enacted to protect or enhance non-material interests—interests in the environment, in historical heritage, in culture” (73). The requisite interest, it was further noted in Alphapharm Pty Ltd v SmithKline Beecham (Australia) Pty Ltd (1994) 49 FCR 250, at 270, per Gummow J, need not be “proprietary or even legal or equitable in nature”.

The sorts of interests that may suffice to satisfy the special interest test are varied. A financial interest may give rise to standing, provided it is not too remotely impacted (see Central Queensland Speleological Society v Central Queensland Cement (1989) 2 QdR 512). An applicant may also have standing if their commercial interests are affected in a sufficiently direct fashion (see *Argos, where two of three applicants made out standing on commercial grounds, the third failing to do so because the threat of loss of income was too speculative). Courts are adamant, however, that there is no right “to be free from competition in the commercial world” (Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd v South Australian Totalizator Agency Board (1984) 37 SASR 67, per White J).

Environmental interests of course loom very large in the standing cases. Interests in environmental conservation in particular are commonly invoked to ground standing (see eg ACF v Commonwealth; ACF v Minister for Resources; North Coast; North Queensland; Friends of Castle Hill; Save the Ridge Inc v Australian Capital Territory (2004) 182 FLR 155; Alliance to Save Hinchinbrook v Environmental Protection Agency (2006) 145 LGERA 32; OneSteel Manufacturing Pty Ltd v Whyalla Red Dust Action Group Inc [2006] 94 SASR 357). Other interests that may ground standing include concerns over the protection of culture and heritage (eg, Onus), the interests of labour associations in the working lives of their members (Shop Distributive and Allied Employees’ Association v Minister for Industrial Affairs (SA) (1995) 183 CLR 552; Marine Engineers), the interests of concerned citizens or organisations wishing to litigate a matter of wide concern (Ogle v Strickland (1987) 71 ALR 41; Re McBain; Ex parte Catholic Bishops Conference (2002) 209 CLR 372), and the interests of individuals or groups in ensuring the enforcement of the law: (Onus; Central Queensland Speleological; OneSteel, Access for All Alliance (Hervey Bay) v Hervey Bay City Council (2007) 162 FCR 313). Note, however, that as mentioned, determinations of standing are very dependent on the particular factual matrix before the court. The mere fact that a given applicant possesses one of the interests mentioned above, which might be adversely impacted by the relevant decision, will not alone suffice for standing.

Factors that courts will consider in determining standing

What can be said about the factors that courts will consider when determining whether an applicant has standing? As was just observed, inquiries into standing are highly context-dependent. There is, as Stephen J put it in Onus, “no ready rule of thumb” that can be mechanistically applied. Whether a given applicant’s interest is sufficiently adversely impacted will depend on the facts of the particular case.

It is, however, possible to isolate some important considerations that courts typically have regard to when determining standing in cases in which the applicant is a public interest group, such as an environmental organisation (see North Coast at 512-513 for a similar list of considerations held to be relevant in that case). Such general factors include:

Whether the organisation is a “peak” body. What qualifies an organisation as a “peak” body is somewhat uncertain. A paradigmatic example of a peak body is one that is national in its scope and membership, and is also an “umbrella” organisation in the sense of encompassing other smaller organisations within itself. By contrast, Chesterman J in North Queensland (at 203) found that the question of whether a body was a peak body could be answered by determining whether the organisation was “serious and responsible”.

That the relevant organisations in the second ACF case and North Coast were found to be peak bodies clearly helped them to make out standing in both cases. In contrast, the local body in Friends of Castle Hill was not a “peak” organisation, and thus its claim for standing was arguably weakened. As a general matter, it is safe to say that regional and especially local interest groups will find it hard to convince a court that they have standing. (Compare the position of the applicant in Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v The Minister for Natural Resources and Mines [2019] 1 QdR 1 and Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v Chief Executive under the Environmental Protection Act 1994 [2018] QSC 22.)

The organisation’s objects. Standing will be easier to show where the objects and purposes for which the body was incorporated relate directly to the subject matter of the decision being challenged. (See eg, Marine Engineers; ACF v Minister; North Coast.)

Whether the organisation enjoys government recognition. This factor was crucial to the applicant’s success on standing in North Coast and the second ACF case. Recognition by either the federal or state/territory governments is relevant (see North Coast, in which the applicant organisation was found to have received recognition by both the Commonwealth and the New South Wales governments). Recognition may take the form of government funding such as grants, or invitations to participate in government decision-making, such as by serving on government advisory committees (see North Coast). In Right to Life, however, Lockhart J (at 67) was of the opinion that government recognition was not “a factor of any real significance”.

The fact that an applicant has made submissions to government in respect of the relevant decision will not guarantee that they have standing (ACF v Commonwealth). Where an applicant is given objector rights, that party may be found to have standing (eg, Sinclair v Mining Warden at Maryborough (1975) 132 CLR 473; Australian Conservation Foundation v South Australia (1990) 53 SASR 349 at 354), but that will not necessarily be the case (see Friends of Castle Hill; Fraser Island Defenders Organisation v Hervey Bay Town Council [1983] 2 Qd R 72 at 78).

“Community values”. Recall the judgment of Stephen J in Onus (later endorsed in ACF v Minister for Resources) to the effect that community values are relevant in determining standing. Clearly there is a potential for this factor to overlap with the “peak body” consideration. For instance, community values may play an important role in determining which bodies count as “peak”, especially if we understand the enquiry into whether a body is peak—like Chesterman J in North Queensland—as one that asks merely whether the body is “serious and responsible”.

The importance of the organisation’s concern with the subject matter of the action. This factor came to the fore in Stephen J’s judgment in Onus, when he asserted that answering questions of standing in public law requires the court in each case to assess “the importance of the concern which a plaintiff has with particular subject matter and of the closeness of that plaintiff’s relationship to that subject matter” (42). This factor appears closely related to the “community values” consideration.

The organisation’s activities. An association is more likely to have standing where their activities relate closely to the subject matter of the decision, whether or not those activities form part of the organisation’s formal objects. The more closely related these activities are to the particular geographic area impacted by the decision, the more likely it is that the group will have standing. (This factor may also overlap with the consideration of government recognition, as the group’s activities may also serve to reveal such recognition.)

Professor Margaret Allars attempted in 1991 to make sense of the somewhat inconsistent case law relating to standing in public interest matters by identifying what she said were two justifications that Federal Court judges typically relied upon when finding that an applicant had standing (Allars, ‘Standing: The Role and Evolution of the Test’ (1991) 20 Federal Law Review 83 at 101). First, Allars argued that the Federal Court was apt to find standing where the applicant had been given a hearing in relation to the decision at issue. Where participation in the decision-making process carries with it an interest on the part of the applicant in the proper conduct of that hearing (and in particular where the applicant has a right to object to the decision that is proposed to be made), the applicant will likely have standing. (See United States Tobacco Co v Minister for Consumer Affairs (1988) 83 ALR 79.) Secondly, according to Allars, the Federal Court’s jurisprudence shows that the court is likely to recognise standing in cases where it is of the view that the applicant is capable of representing the public interest. A strong case can be made that the result in the second ACF case, as well as North Coast, was largely due to the court’s view that the applicant in both cases would make a good champion of the public interest.

In the final analysis, it is not possible to point to a list of necessary and sufficient conditions for establishing standing for equitable or statutory remedies. If all of the factors outlined above tell in favour of an applicant’s standing, the court will almost certainly find that standing exists. If all of the factors tell against standing, the applicant will almost certainly be found to lack standing. The trickier cases, of course, are those in which—as is common—consideration of one or more factors argues in favour of standing at the same time as consideration of other factors undermines the case for standing.

While none of the factors outlined above is sufficient to establish standing, an applicant may be found to have standing if sufficiently many of those factors tell in its favour. In other words, a cumulative case for standing may win the day. Such was the finding of Gummow J, for instance, in Marine Engineers. In that case, the question was whether applicant institute was entitled to apply (under s 13 of the ADJR Act) for a statement of reasons in regard to a “manning notice” issued under a taxation statute. The notice estimated for tax purposes the number of workers—at least some of whom were members of the institute—that were needed to operate a ship.

The right to reasons under the ADJR Act and the JR Act will be addressed in the next workshop. Suffice it for now to note that standing to request reasons under the two Acts, like standing to seek statutory remedies, requires that the applicant be a “person aggrieved”. As such, Gummow J’s decision in the Marine Engineers case highlighted: the fact that the institute’s objects—including “the obtaining and maintenance of reasonable conditions of employment of its members”—related directly to the subject matter of the action; the fact that it had been “invited to participate in the Manning Committee in respect of the ship in question and made submissions in regard to the proposed manning notice”; and the fact that “the manning notice may be a determinant of the number of members of the applicant that will be engaged” (133). Importantly, Gummow J asserted that “whilst no single one of the above matters might be adequate, looking at the picture they build up, the applicant does have a sufficient interest to constitute it a person aggrieved” (133).

In a helpfully succinct summation of circumstances in which standing will be found to exist, Gummow J concluded that “there flows from the [manning notice] decision … a danger and peril to the interests of the applicant that is clear and imminent rather than remote, indirect or fanciful, and the applicant has an interest in the matter of an intensity and degree well above that of an ordinary member of the public” (133-134; see also Broadbridge v Stammers at 298).

3.	Standing under the Administrative Review Tribunal Act

The ART is created by statute. Specifically, it is created by the aptly, if unimaginatively, named Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024 (Cth). It is to that statute, then, that we should turn in order to ascertain who has standing to apply for merits review before the tribunal. The relevant section of the ART Act is s 17, which reads:

17 Who can apply

(1) 	A person whose interests are affected by a reviewable decision may apply to the Tribunal for review of the decision.

Note 1:	For which decisions are reviewable decisions, see section 12.

Note 2:	For when an organisation’s or association’s interests are taken to be affected, see section 15.

Note 3:	Section 173 provides a right of appeal to the Federal Court if the Tribunal decides that a person’s interests are not affected by a reviewable decision.

(2) 	To avoid doubt, a person may apply even if the person is the Commonwealth or an authority, tribunal or other body (whether incorporated or not) that is established by an Act or an instrument made under an Act.

A person or organisation has standing to lodge an application for review by the ART, therefore, if the party’s interests are affected by the decision to be reviewed. Technically, the party need not be adversely affected: “interests may be affected by a decision either adversely or beneficially” (Re Control Investments Pty Ltd and Australian Broadcasting Tribunal (No 1) (1980) 3 ALD 74 at 77, per Davies J). In applying the AAT equivalent to ART Act s17, there was heavy reliance on the case law relating to standing for declarations and injunctions and for review under the judicial review statutes (ie, the ADJR Act and the JR Act). It is safe to say, however, that the ART will follow the AAT and take a particularly liberal and flexible approach to matters of standing (see, for example, Kannan and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (1978) 1 ALD 489; Re Welborn and Department of Health, Housing and Community Services (1993) 30 ALD 759; Re Son and Australian Trade Commission (2005) 86 ALD 469). Based on the AAT’s decision in Re Control Investments (No 1), for instance, the ART is likely to understand its test for standing as less restrictive than the common law test for standing for declarations and injunctions.

Section 15 is an interesting provision of the ART Act. It explicitly recognises the standing of incorporated or unincorporated organisations or associations where the decision in respect of which merits review is sought “relates to a matter included in the objects or purposes of the organisation or association at the time the decision is made …”. As such, the enquiry into whether a public interest organisation or association has standing to seek ART review is often simpler than the enquiry into standing for judicial review under the ADJR Act and JR Act. That is, drawing on our list of factors relevant to standing in the context of declarations and injunctions and statutory judicial review, only one such element needs to be present for the applicant to have standing before the ART. Specifically, the applicant organisation or association need only show that their objects and purposes relate to the decision they wish to have reviewed. Where that is the case, no enquiry into whether the organisation/association is a “peak” body, or recognised by government, etc, needs to be made. (Where the decision does not relate to a matter included in the organisation/association’s objects or purposes, the organisation/association may still be able to establish standing. Here the court will look to the other factors enumerated above, in order to determine whether the organisation/association has a special interest.)

4.	OTHER STANDING RELATED ISSUES

Standing for the prerogative writs

The standing requirements for the writs of certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus will be discussed in the context of the upcoming class on the writs generally.

Joinder

The issue of joinder is closely related to standing, and so will be discussed briefly here. Both the ADJR Act (in s 12) and the JR Act (in s 28), provide that where an application for judicial review of a decision, conduct, or the failure to make a decision has been made, another person who is “interested in” that decision, conduct, or failure to decide “may apply to the court to be made a party to the application”. (Other powers to join parties can be found in Rules 61 and 62 of the Uniform Civil Procedure Rules, as well as Rules 9.02 and 9.05 of the Federal Court Rules and s 23 of the Federal Court of Australia Act 1976 (Cth).) Unless the court makes an order to the contrary, a party that is joined will hold all the rights of a party to the proceedings, including the right to appeal against a decision. They may also be liable for orders for costs.

The test for standing to be joined as a party therefore turns on whether the applicant is “interested” in the underlying issue that is being reviewed. In ascertaining when a party is so interested, the courts turn to the test for standing for seeking judicial review in the first place—ie, they turn to the “person aggrieved” test, which, as we know, can be said to have converged with the common law’s “special interest” test for standing for declarations and injunctions. (See United States Tobacco Co v Minister for Consumer Affairs (1988) 83 ALR 79, where the Full Federal Court found that a “similar approach” should be adopted in applying the test for standing and the test for joining a party.)

An important point to note in regards to joinder—under both Acts—is that an applicant is not entitled as of right to be joined as a party, even if they do qualify as an interested person. This is because joinder is discretionary. The courts may, at their discretion, refuse to join an interested party.  A party cannot, under either Act, be made a party to an application for review without their consent.

Amicus curiae

Joinder is similar to, but different from, the power of the court to hear an “amicus curaie”—or, “friend of the court”. The function of an amicus curiae is to aid the court “by drawing attention to some aspect of the case which might otherwise be overlooked” (Bropho v Tickner (1993) 40 FCR 165 at 172 (per Wilcox J)). (On the role of an amicus generally, see United States Tobacco Company v the Minister of Consumer Affairs and the Trade Practices Commission (1988) 83 ALR 79; see also the Australian Law Reform Commission, Beyond the Door-Keeper: Standing to Sue for Public Remedies, Report 78 (1996) ch 6.)

An amicus curiae is not a party to the proceedings. Reliance upon an amicus curiae during judicial review proceedings under the ADJR Act and JR Act is uncommon. (On the dangers of seeking to appear as an amicus curiae as opposed to seeking joinder, see Re McBain ex parte Australian Catholic Bishops Conference (2001) 209 CLR 372 at [14], [36], [119], [226] and [283].)

Intervention by the Attorney General

Both the ADJR Act (s 18) and the JR Act (s 51) allow for the Attorney General to intervene in judicial review proceedings under the respective Acts.

5.	Standing as a public policy issue

Why does the law impose a standing requirement in the administrative law context? Why not permit anyone who wishes to seek judicial review under the ADJR Act and JR Act to do so? Likewise, why have any standing requirements for declaratory or injunctive relief, or for the writs?

Historically, the major concern has been that without a standing requirement, the proverbial floodgates might open, unleashing a torrent of unmeritorious challenges to a whole host of government decision-making by mere “cranks” and “busybodies” with no personal stake in the matter. (For specific references to “cranks” and “busybodies”, see Onus v Alcoa, per Gibbs CJ at 35; and R v Inland Revenue Commissioners; Ex parte National Federation of Self-Employed and Small Business Ltd [1980] QB 407 per Lord Denning). This, it is feared, could profoundly reduce the efficiency with which the executive branch of government carries out its administrative functions. The spectre is that of essentially strategic litigation commenced largely in order to frustrate government decision-making by those who convince themselves “that there is cause for grievance when there is none” (R v Inland Revenue Commissioners; Ex parte National Federation at 422).

A principled rationale for the need for standing requirements is given by McHugh J in his judgment in Bateman’s Bay at [81]:

It is a corollary of the proposition that the basic purpose of the civil courts is to protect individual rights that it is not part of their function to enforce the public law of the community or to oversee the enforcement of the civil or criminal law, except as an incident in the course of protecting the rights of individuals whose rights have been, are being, or may be interfered with by reason of a breach of law. Courts do not initiate prosecutions, for example; nor do they initiate civil actions.

McHugh J argued further that standing requirements are appropriate and necessary in order for the courts not to usurp the role of the executive branch of government:

The enforcement of the public law of a community is part of the political process; it is one of the chief responsibilities of the executive government. In most cases, it is for the executive government and not for the civil courts acting at the behest of disinterested private individuals to enforce the law. [83] … The decision when and in what circumstances to enforce public law frequently calls for a fine judgment as to what the public interest truly requires. It is a decision that is arguably best made by the Attorney-General who must answer to the people, rather than by unelected judges expanding the doctrine of standing to overcome what they see as a failure of the political process to ensure that the law is enforced. [86]

The notion that absent a formal test for standing, courts might be called upon to determine the ultimately political question of what is in the public interest is echoed by Lord Wilberforce in Gouriet v Union of Post Office Workers [1978] AC 435 at 482:

The distinction between public rights, which the Attorney-General can and the individual (absent special interest) cannot seek to enforce, and private rights, is fundamental in our law. To break it, as the plaintiff’s counsel frankly invited us to do, is not a development of the law, but a destruction of one of its pillars … . The decisions to be made as to the public interest are not such as courts are fitted or equipped to make. The very fact, that, as the present case very well shows, decisions are of the type to attract political criticism and controversy, shows that they are outside the range of discretionary problems which the courts can resolve.

Another commonly invoked rationale for standing is that the standing requirements help to improve the calibre of litigation. For example, in Kuczborski v Queensland (2014) 254 CLR 51, at [184]-[186], Crennan, Kiefel, Gageler and Keane JJ observed that:

The established requirements as to standing ensure that the work of the courts remains focused upon the determination of rights, duties, liabilities and obligations as the most concrete and specific expression of the law in its practical operation, rather than the writing of essays of essentially academic interest. To recognise that a person has a sufficient interest to seek the exercise of judicial power where that exercise is apt to affect “the legal situation of persons subject to the jurisdiction of the court” … serves to maintain the ordinary characteristics of judicial power … .  [A]dherence to the established requirements as to standing is generally apt to improve the quality of judicial decision-making by ensuring that the focus and strength of the arguments advanced by the parties reflect the importance of the prospective outcome for the parties … .

See also the Australian Law Reform Commission’s (ALRC) report, Standing in Public Interest Litigation, Report No 27 (1985) at 116-117.

Relatedly, it is often asserted that were there no standing requirements, this could cause great unfairness. For example, an open standing regime might see X suing in relation to a matter that affects only Y. It seems unfair that the court would make a conclusive judgment on the relevant legal issue—binding on inferior courts at least until reversed by a higher court—without Y’s having had any involvement in the proceedings. This is all the more so, we imagine, if X—owing to the fact that her interests are not actually at stake—is unlikely to prosecute the matter with the same care and concern as Y would have shown. Further, the alternative of allowing Y, subsequent to the decision in the case brought by X, to bring an additional and separate challenge to the underlying governmental decision, would plainly open the door to repetitive litigation.

On the other hand, there is plenty of vocal support for further liberalising the tests for standing in administrative law contexts in Australia. This could take one of three forms. First, we could do away with standing requirements altogether, thus creating an ‘open standing’ regime. Secondly, the courts could simply apply the existing test for standing in a less restrictive fashion. As noted by R Creyke et al, Control of Government Action: Text, Cases & Commentary (7th ed, LexisNexis, 2025) at 303, “[a]rguably, this view has already taken root as illustrated by cases such as North Coast and Ogle v Strickland … .” A third option is to systematically reform the law of standing, without going so far as to embrace outright open standing.

This third option has been twice proposed, in 1985 and 1996, by the ALRC. The earlier report advocated essentially for a baseline of open standing, but with an empowering of the courts to disallow standing in the cases of “mere meddlers”. The ALRC describe the proposed standing regime as “an open door, but with a pest screen” (Standing in Public Interest Litigation (Report No 27, 1985), p xxi). The ALRC’s 1996 report (Beyond the Door-keeper: Standing to Sue for Public Remedies, Report No 78 (1996) at 5.25) proposed that:

Any person should be able to commence and maintain public law proceedings unless:

the relevant legislation clearly indicates an intention that the decision or conduct sought to be litigated should not be the subject of challenge by a person such as the applicant; or in all the circumstances it would not be in the public interest to proceed because to do so would unreasonably interfere with the ability of a person having a private interest in the matter to deal with it differently or not at all.

Why might we favour open standing, or at least a further relaxation of the current test for standing? A range of rationales have been advanced. One concern, of a very fundamental sort, is that “[s]tanding rules should not inhibit courts from restraining unlawful government action and thus safeguarding the rule of law” (Creyke et al at 304). These concerns are particularly pressing if one shares the scepticism of Gaudron, Gummow, and Kirby JJ in Bateman’s Bay as to the plausibility of the Attorney General serving as a sufficient check on unlawful executive action.

Other commentators allege that the current standing requirements are at odds with the desire to “increase means of citizen participation in the processes of government” that allegedly motivated the ground-breaking administrative law reforms of the late 1970s (see Fisher and Kirk, ‘Still Standing: An Argument for Open Standing in Australia and England’ (1997) 71 Australian Law Journal 370 at 381). As such, it is claimed, “open standing can be justified by reference to democratic theory” (Fisher and Kirk, “Still Standing”, at 381).

It is also alleged that the current test for standing “is not very precise” (Sir Gerard Brennan, “The Purpose and Scope of Judicial Review” in M Taggart (ed), Judicial Review of Administrative Action in the 1980s: Problems and Prospects (Oxford University Press, 1986) at 26) and, perhaps unsurprisingly, “has not produced any satisfactory body of jurisprudence” (Fisher and Kirk, at 381).

Finally, it is further argued that in any case the courts have sufficient means to manage the litigation process and prevent needless lawsuits without having to resort to the “filter” of standing. As the ALRC’s Overview of its 1996 Report put it, “The current law on standing … acts as an extra source of unnecessary legal costs and delay. It does not act as an effective filter for disputes that are futile, vexatious or otherwise inappropriate for litigation. Such a filter is provided by other laws and discretions available to the court … .”

Were the requirements of standing for review under the ADJR Act or the JR Act significantly relaxed, this would likely need to be coupled with modifications to the statutory provisions which provide for a right to reasons under the Acts. For reasons that will become evident when we turn to a discussion of the right to reasons, moving to open standing for applications for review without amending the right to reasons provisions would threaten to overwhelm public decision-makers by allowing potentially millions of individuals with no stake in the relevant decisions to demand that they be issued reasons for those decisions.

Workshop 8 Discussion Questions

Topic 1 – ADJR Act, JR Act and Equitable Remedies – Standing

Essential Reading:

The Australian Conservation Foundation Inc v The Commonwealth (1979) 146 CLR 493, 527-532;

Onus v Alcoa of Australia Ltd (1981) 149 CLR 27, 35-36 and 42;

Bateman’s Bay Local Aboriginal Land Council v Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund Pty Ltd (1998) 194 CLR 247, 262-263;

North Coast Environment Council Inc v Minister for Resources (No 2)(1994) 55 FCR 492, 502-514;

Right to Life Association (NSW) Inc v Secretary, Department of Human Services and Health (1995) 56 FCR 50, 67;

Argos Pty Ltd v Corbell, Minister for the Environment and Sustainable Development (2014) 254 CLR 394, [33], [42], [48], [79]-[80] and [86];

Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v The Minister for Natural Resources and Mines [2019] 1 QdR 1, [63]-[65].

Questions for Discussion

(1) Critically analyse the relationship between the requirement that an applicant be “aggrieved” under the JR Act and the test for standing for declarations and injunctions.

(2) In your view, are standing requirements for judicial review compatible with ensuring access to justice?

(3) The Mining Industry Infrastructure Act 2016 (Qld) (“the Act”) authorises provision, by the Queensland Government, of financial support to mining infrastructure projects that are “likely to enhance the economic wellbeing of the State of Queensland”. Section 3 of the Act provides that:

“[t]he purpose of this Act is to facilitate the economic development of the State of Queensland through the provision of financial support to significant infrastructure projects in the mining industry. The subject matter of this Act is exclusively the economic development of the State of Queensland. The scope of this Act does not extend to seeking to advance environmental values which are advanced under other Queensland and Commonwealth legislation”.

Section 7 of the Act provides a procedure for the making of infrastructure funding applications to the Queensland Department of Infrastructure Development. Section 8 confers upon the Minister for Infrastructure Development (“the Minister”) the power to authorise provision of finance on terms more generous than commercial loans for the construction of mining infrastructure that meets the criteria set out in Section 7 of the Act.

Resource Infrastructure Ltd is planning to construct a new railway line that will connect existing railway infrastructure to a large mineral deposit 150km away from the infrastructure (“the Project”).  Resource Infrastructure Ltd applies to the Minister under section 7 of the Act for infrastructure funding. The Minister decides to authorise the provision of a $500 million low interest loan to Resource Infrastructure Ltd in support of the Project.

The region in which the Project is planned is the last known habitat of the Copper Crested Cockatoo, an endangered cockatoo species.  Alice is the owner of a large rural property in the same region on which she runs 20,000 head of cattle. In 1995, Alice agreed to lease, for a nominal rent, a small parcel of her property to Belinda, who has been running a commercially successful bird watching business centred on a small colony of Copper Crested Cockatoos that regularly nests on Alice’s property. Members of the Avian Conservation Collective (“the Collective”) are regular clients of Belinda’s birdwatching business. The Collective is an incorporated association. Its constitution provides that it is dedicated to “[t]he conservation and study of endemic Avian species in the State of Queensland.” Members of the Collective include leading Queensland ornithologists and the Collective has published the most comprehensive academic study of the Copper Crested Cockatoo. The Queensland Department of the Environment has invited members of the Collective to serve on a governmental consultative committee established to assist conservation efforts being made to protect the Copper Crested Cockatoo.

The Collective is concerned that the proposed railway line to be constructed by Resource Infrastructure Ltd will have significant adverse consequences for the Copper Crested Cockatoo population on Alice’s property. Being a particularly sensitive species, it is feared that noise from the railway line will prevent Copper Crested Cockatoos from nesting in the vicinity of the proposed railway line. The noise of the railway line will not affect the cattle on Alice’s property. Belinda is concerned about the potential financial effects on her successful birdwatching business of the proposed railway line.

Alice, Belinda and the Collective are considering the initiation of judicial review proceedings under the Judicial Review Act 1991 (Qld) challenging the legality of the Minister’s decision to authorise funding for the Project. Alice, Belinda and the Collective are concerned, however, that they may not have standing to seek judicial review under the Judicial Review Act 1991 (Qld).

You are asked to provide a detailed advice to Alice, Belinda and the Collective as to whether each of them would have standing to seek judicial review under the Judicial Review Act 1991 (Qld). Would your advice to Alice, Belinda and the Collective on standing be different if each was instead seeking judicial review via the Supreme Court’s inherent jurisdiction to issue injunctive or declaratory relief?

End.