# Chapter 1

Corporate law, like all law, has a context; indeed, it has many contexts. To understand corporate law today, we need to appreciate the forces—social, political, economic, global and local—which shape that law. Modern corporations and contemporary Australian corporate law should be understood as a product of, and a compromise between, various social, economic and legal ideas and philosophies. This is the focus of the first two chapters of this book. We begin by looking at two contextual settings of contemporary Australian corporate law: its history and its regulatory structure. This chapter will explain the history of the modern corporation and the various approaches to regulating corporate conduct. History is important; it assists in understanding how and why modern corporations and the law that regulates them have developed into their current form. A deeper appreciation of modern corporations and their regulatory framework can be gained by understanding why things have developed as they have. The corporation and corporate law were not invented in a single session by the work of enlightened lawyers or politicians. Things have evolved in a piecemeal and sometimes inconsistent fashion. They were not developed in harmony. Key steps in the evolution of the corporation as a legal structure often occurred despite the intentions of law-makers. This book will refer to and compare the historical antecedents of the various concepts and ideas which comprise modern corporate law in Australia. Chapter 1 presents an historical overview and framework to assist the reader with subsequent material. Necessarily, this will be a truncated version of corporate history. When reading the chapter, it is important to bear in mind that ‘history means interpretation‘! Historians take different views and provide different accounts of historical events. This is true of corporate law history, and it is not our intention to canvass the full range of historical arguments. The reader is encouraged to pursue more detailed studies, using the materials referred to in the footnotes.2 In this chapter, we ask the reader to temporarily postpone the quest for a more detailed explanation of the legal concepts that are introduced. We will come back to examine these concepts in detail elsewhere in the book. Corporate lawyers might think that the corporation is a legal structure over which they have a unique claim to expertise. However, many of the features that are integral to modern corporations—such as automatic incorporation on registration, limited liability of members, and the division of functions between managers and members—owe their origins to the efforts of merchants, business people, politicians, and economists, as well as those of lawyers.2 The basic features of modern corporations developed because of concerns that emerged between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries. This section identifies some broad themes that have underpinned the rise of the corporation and corporate law. The details of the history are supplied in subsequent sections of the chapter. It is important to keep in mind that at the time when early corporate law was developed, English law was in the process of laying down its modern liberal foundations. The political philosophy of liberalism emphasises that society is made up of private individuals who possess rights, owe each other duties, and should be personally liable for their actions. How could a legal system built upon such ideas accommodate the growth of group enterprises? The history of corporate law can be interpreted as a series of attempts to address this fundamental question. This question subsumes four points of tension which are central to corporate regulation in a liberal legal system. First, there is the ‘group versus individual’ issue. To what extent should the law recognise corporations, rather than individuals or investors, as bearers of rights, obligations and liabilities? In the corporate law context, this question has arisen in a number of ways. For example, should members of a group enterprise be able to minimise the risk of commercial failure by limiting their liability, or should the same principles of legal responsibility apply as for individual traders? Should a group be able to hold title toproperty as distinct from the individual members? Should a group be able to pursue or defend legal claims to the exclusion of individual members? Asecond tension lies between the roles of management and ‘ownership’ of the corporation. Liberal philosophy emphasises the freedom of the individual to own property and, within limits, to control its use and disposal. However, the efficient operation of a group enterprise will often require that control of the enterprise and its assets be exercised by a small group of managers on behalf of the larger group of members. Thus, most large corporations are structured ina way that separates the ‘ownership’ function of members from the management function of directors and company officers.4 Accordingly, issues of internal responsibility and accountability are important in the development of modern corporations. Equally important is the question of external responsibility and accountability. For example, how should the relationship between the association and outside parties, such as creditors and customers, be addressed? Should this be a matter of contractual negotiation, or should the state set standards or rules? This takes us to the third tension, which is the debate between facilitation and intervention. What is the role of government regulation in relation to corporations? If, for example, corporations are regarded primarily as private entities, then, arguably, the role of the state should be primarily facilitative rather than interventionist. The law should assist individuals in the private pursuit of profit because this, in turn, will promote economic efficiency. There should be a minimum of mandatory or punitive rules regarding corporate behaviour. The opposing view in this debate stresses the role of corporations as important social and economic actors, justifying a more interventionist role by the state. This perspective points to the impact that corporate operations can have on the environment, people's financial welfare? and the health and safety of workers, among other issues. It also acknowledges the increasing role played by corporations in key aspects of twenty-first century life, including the development of technology to gather, control and use vast amounts of information and data.® The fourth tension is the ‘private versus public’ issue. This involves a debate about the legal and political status of corporations. For example, to what extent should corporations be regarded simply as associations created by, and operating for the benefit of, private initiative, versus a view that corporations owe their legal existence to the state and therefore have broad public or social responsibilities? These perennial debates provide the basic elements for a conceptual framework to which the reader can refer and develop throughout this book. We begin this process by examining the historical manifestation of these issues. The origins of today’s corporate structures can be traced back to medieval times.4 However, a more manageable starting point for present purposes is the developments in England beginning in the seventeenth century. This is a convenient point from which to chart the development of the corporation, as well as the beginnings of legislative and regulatory responses. As we have noted, the features regarded as intrinsic to the modern corporation did not develop at the same time. Across the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, we see these various features emerging in different types of joint enterprise. It is only later that they came to be united within a single type of entity. One of the earliest examples of joint enterprise to bear some resemblance to the business corporations of today were companies incorporated either by the Crown or by Parliament. These were associations, formed for some commercial or ostensibly public purpose, that petitioned for grants of legal status as entities in their own right. The new entities had legal capacities distinct from the individuals involved in the enterprise. These grants of incorporation could be acquired only by Royal Charter from the Crown or by a private Act of Parliament. Such a Charter or Act might define aspects of the legal relationships which would exist between the newly created legal entity and the individuals who participated in the enterprise. Limited liability of members for debts of the business was not necessarily an express part of the grant of incorporation, although it was often assumed that each member was liable only to the extent of his or her capital contribution. Charters often purported to limit the grant of incorporation to a defined number of years, although many companies continued to trade on the basis of outdated charters, as seen below. These early corporations were based on an idea that lies at the heart of the development of the modern company—the joint stock principle. Each original member of the company contributed to a common fund that was managed by a committee selected from the members. Profits, in the form of dividends, were then distributed to the members in proportion to their shareholding. In this context, the term ‘joint stock’ referred to the trading or floating capital that was used by the company in the course of the enterprise. It was possible for members to transfer their share in the enterprise to others without seeking the permission of other members. This free transferability meant that membership in a joint stock venture was often shaped more by the expectation of financial gain than by personal involvement in the enterprise. The advantage of the common fund of capital—or joint stock—was that it permitted the risks associated with expensive and long-term ventures (such as foreign trade) to be spread across a large number of investors. The most prominent examples of these chartered companies were large foreign trading companies, such as the East India Company and the Hudson Bay Company. As their names suggest, the principal advantage of incorporation by charter was that it gave an exclusive right to conduct trade in a particular geographical area. These monopoly trading rights and special privileges were the main reason for seeking incorporation, as a recompense for the risks involved in undertaking large-scale foreign trading ventures. The advantage for the state in granting corporate status to the venture, particularly in the case of the foreign trading companies, was that trade could be encouraged and controlled, while revenue in the form of taxes and duties could be raised. Thus, chartered companies played a critical role in Britain's colonial expansion Alongside the joint stock principle was the idea that ownership of the capital contributed by investors could be separated from the control of that capital. While investors or financiers bought shares in a company, owning shares in the company did not necessarily give them other rights that are customarily associated with property ownership. Adam Smith, in his book The Wealth of Nations (published in 1776), noted that the joint stock principle usually resulted in a division of functions within the company: ‘The trade of a joint stock company is always managed by a court of directors. The court, indeed, is frequently subject, in many respects, to the controul [sic] of a general court of proprietors. But the greater part of those proprietors seldom pretend to understand any thing of the business of the company; and when the spirit of faction happens not to prevail among them, give themselves no trouble about it, but receive contentedly such half yearly or yearly dividend, as the directors think proper to make to them. This total exemption from trouble and from risk, beyond a limited sum, encourages many people to become adventurers in joint stock companies, who would upon no account, hazard their fortunes in any private copartnery.2 The separation of ownership of shares by members from control of the business by its managers is fundamental to all contemporary large-scale corporate enterprises. This underlies perennial questions about the extent to which minority shareholders should be bound by the decisions of the majority, and whether a company’s directors should be regulated by specific contractual obligations created by their company or by statutory rules that apply to all companies. These questions are dealt with later in this book. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the alternative to incorporation was to trade as a commercial partnership. The idea of the partnership preceded the incorporated company. Since the Middle Ages, the most widely used form of partnership in English law was the societas (as it was called in Roman law). This form of association had no legal status, although it was usual to trade under a firm name. The individual partners shared the profits and losses as well as bearing the liabilities of the enterprise between them. The direct involvement of all partners in the business imposed practical limits on the size of the partnership and the size of the business. This was less of a problem for the alternative form of partnership, again derived from Roman law, known as the commenda. This allowed for a distinction to be made between the active partners, who bore full liability, and the dormant partners, who were liable only for the amount which they undertook to contribute. This form of partnership was not widely used in England, one reason being that English accounting practice was slow to recognise the need to separate the accounts of the firm from the capital accounts of the individual partners." Instead, the societas was used more frequently, although over time its structure came increasingly to approximate that of the commenda. When identifying the main forms of business association in common usage during this period, we emphasise the differences between the terms ‘company’, ‘partnership’ and ‘corporation’2 In the eighteenth century, ‘company’ did not carry the specific legal meaning it has today. The term was used primarily to refer to a commercial association having a particular economic form. Companies were regarded as being comprised of a large number of members, with the business being managed by a smaller committee. The term ‘partnership’ was used to refer to a relatively small association of individuals, most of whom would have some involvement in managing the enterprise. At common law, both companies and partnerships were regarded as sharing the same legal features. In particular, neither had any separate legal status.43 A joint stock company was regarded as a company even though it was not incorporated. If a joint stock company was incorporated by charter or special Act, the term ‘corporation’ would be used to describe its legal status. It is only later that the term ‘company’ came to have an exclusively legal meaning, denoting a distinct legal entity with its own legal status. The rapid expansion of trade in the eighteenth century meant that commercial associations often required large accumulations of capital. This led to the gradual transformation of partnerships from the societas to larger, more dispersed forms. Like the commenda, these large partnerships often consisted of a number of passive investors joining together on the basis of the joint stock principle. In practice, there was little difference between unincorporated joint stock companies and corporations which operated under a grant of incorporation by charter or statute, other than the monopoly rights which were granted in the latter case. In most other respects, incorporation or the lack of it made little practical difference.!4 Nevertheless, unincorporated firms were classified for legal purposes as ‘partnerships’ and were treated accordingly. It was usual for an unincorporated company’s constitution to provide that shares in joint stock were freely transferable by members. An organised and sometimes volatile market developed to facilitate the trading of these shares. The periods during which stock prices rose dramatically and subsequently fell had a significant influence on attitudes towards the regulation of the corporate form. There were concerns about the practice whereby entrepreneurs would either form an unincorporated joint stock company or, more frequently, take over a disused charter company. The public would then be invited to invest by purchasing joint stock. These invitations were often associated with inflated or vague promises about the company’s prospects and likely returns, and these ventures came to be described as ‘bubbles’/5 The author of a 1923 text on the history of English company law provided the following description of the worst of these practices: In some cases only sixpence or a shilling per cent. was demanded upon first subscription, and so gullible had the public become that in many cases some obscure opener of books of subscription, contenting himself with what he had got in the morning, was not to be found in the afternoon, the room he had hired for the day being shut up, and he and his subscription book never heard of again!!6 The most prominent example of this sort of speculation involved the South Sea Company and what became known as the ‘South Sea Bubble’ This company was formed in 1711, initially with the object of obtaining a trade monopoly with rich Spanish colonies in South America and the West Indies. The venture was sufficiently successful: in 1719, the company offered to take over almost all the national debt from the British Government. Under this scheme, the company would pay creditors of the Government, mostly holders of annuities,” in full. The payment could either be in cash or in the form of shares in the company. In short, creditors of the British Government were being offered the chance to swap their claims against the Government for shares in what looked to be a prosperous company. The Government benefited because, under the scheme, the interest payable on the debt owed to the annuity holders was to be reduced. The benefit to the company lay in holding a loan on which the Government paid interest and the anticipation that this could be used by the company to raise further sums to extend its trading venture. It was hoped that a close association with the Government would be good publicity and a source of investor confidence. The success of the scheme depended upon the market value of the company’s shares remaining high so that annuity holders would be tempted to invest. The scheme was a huge success initially, judging by the large numbers of people who invested in the company and the upward surge in the company’s share price. Eventually the share price collapsed, and the South Sea Bubble was burst. This speculation boom rapidly spilt into the stocks of other companies, many of which were formed solely to take advantage of the investment frenzy. Apart from the potential for fraud and wild speculation, there were further implications raised by the joint stock principle and the separation of management functions from membership. Throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, these were highlighted by writers from diverse political perspectives. Adam Smith, described as the ‘father’ of classical laissez-faire economics, conceded that grants of monopolies and special privileges by the state might be necessary for the introduction of new types of commerce. However, he argued that, in the long term, this form of government intervention impeded the growth of productivity and free trade.18 In part, this was because the directors of these companies were managing other people’s money. He stated: .-. it cannot well be expected, that they should watch over it with the same anxious vigilance with which the partners in a copartnery frequently watch over their own. ... Negligence and profusion, therefore, must always prevail, more or less, in the management of the affairs of such a company.2 Smith argued that the joint stock company form was only appropriate for certain types of ventures, such as banking, insurance, and the construction of canals and aqueducts. In these essential trades, the operations of the company were so routine or uniform that the risk of managerial abuse was minimal. The liberal philosopher John Stuart Mill acknowledged the risk that‘hired servant’ directors of a joint stock company might not exhibit the same commitment to the job as the owner-managers of private partnerships. Mill also urged that the joint stock company had two advantages: it had the capacity to undertake large-scale enterprise on a continuing basis, and it was possible to hire directors with the skills appropriate to the enterprise in question. 22 From a different political perspective to that of Smith and Mill, in the nineteenth century Karl Marx saw the rise of the joint stock company as evidence of the inevitable contradictions and instabilities within capitalism. Marx argued that because those who owned the capital—the members—were not directly involved in its management, then the potential for expansion into new risky business ventures would no longer be governed by the knowledge and experience of the owners. Moreover, the economic role of the capitalist was now carried out by a person who was‘a mere manager, administrator of other people's capital’2! This ‘private production without the control of private property’22 meant capitalism would be driven by financial speculation rather than the needs of production, leading to its eventual decline. The unparalleled level of share speculation eventually led to the collapse of many of the ‘bubble companies’ in 1720. The loss of investor confidence that followed caused a general panic in the stock market which burst the investment bubble. Just prior to these events, the British Parliament passed the first instance of modern company legislation—the Bubble Act 17202 The purpose of this Act was an attempt to confine the benefits of the boom market to the South Sea Company. The Act sought to achieve this by making it illegal to form a joint stock company and to create transferable shares without a grant of legal authority, either by Act of Parliament or by Royal Charter. In other words, unincorporated companies with transferable shares were prohibited, and only incorporated companies and common law partnerships were allowed to continue. While there were only a few immediate prosecutions under the Act, it had a symbolic impact, expressing widespread disapproval and concern at the excesses produced by rampant financial speculation. Although the Act did not result in an increase in the number of petitions to Parliament for incorporation, it influenced the scope of speculative activity. In the face of legal restrictions in the Act, the main alternative to incorporation for commercial enterprises was to operate as a partnership. However, the problem for business people was that the partnership had its own legal restrictions. Under the common law, a partnership could not hold property in its own name. Interests in the partnership could only be transferred with the consent of the other partners, each partner was liable for the debts of the partnership, and the partnership was subject to dissolution on the death or withdrawal of any one partner. Partnerships at common law lacked two features needed for an investment vehicle: free transferability of shares and continuity of existence. To meet the demands for a commercial entity that would overcome these limitations but not fall foul of the Bubble Act, lawyers developed a de facto corporation: an association based on the equitable trust. Investors subscribed funds which were then vested in trustees to be held on trust and managed according to the purposes specified in a deed of settlement. The deed contained a series of mutual promises and undertakings between the investors (members of the company) and the trustees.24 These ‘deed of settlement companies’ continued to use the joint stock principle but relied upon equity law to overcome the legislative prohibitions and the common law restrictions. As the English legal historian Maitland described it: In truth and in deed we made corporations without troubling King or Parliament, though perhaps we said we were doing nothing of the kind.25 These companies had joint stock, which divided ownership into units, but in order to escape the prohibitions of the Bubble Act there would be some nominal restriction on the transfer of stock.2® As with earlier companies based on the joint stock principle, owners of shares in deed of settlement companies had little, if any, involvement in management of the company, which was conducted by a managing committee. Deed of settlement companies were only recognised in equity, whereas the courts of common law only recognised incorporated companies or partnerships. Deed of settlement companies, as far as the common law was concerned, were classified as partnerships. The position has been summed up as follows: ‘The two branches of the law were thus in conflict over the new business unit, and against the common law’s attitude that there was no such thing as an unincorporated joint stock company, was the definite development of an institution somewhere between partnership and incorporated company, under Chancery jurisdiction.22 The unintended effect of the prohibitions in the Bubble Act was to give the courts of equity a prominent role in the development of the joint stock company. By the end of the eighteenth century, commercial enterprise was increasingly organised on the basis of deed of settlement companies.28 While these companies became popular, incorporated companies continued to be created. The industrial boom, with its demand for canals and railways, meant that companies formed for such purposes could confidently seek a private Act from Parliament. These Acts conferred a varying range of benefits on the companies. Some Acts granted the power to sue and be sued in the name of a company officer. Others granted special powers relating to the acquisition of land. But obtaining a grant of incorporation to secure these benefits was not guaranteed, remaining within the realm of Royal or Parliamentary prerogative.22 Incorporation was seen as a privilege conferred by the state. We will see in Chapter 2 that this historical view continues to have implications for the regulation of corporations today. Another point of distinction between companies established by deed of settlement and those given incorporated status deserves emphasis. We have seen The unparalleled level of share speculation eventually led to the collapse of many of the ‘bubble companies’ in 1720. The loss of investor confidence that followed caused a general panic in the stock market which burst the investment bubble. Just prior to these events, the British Parliament passed the first instance of modern company legislation—the Bubble Act 172022 The purpose of this Act was an attempt to confine the benefits of the boom market to the South Sea Company. The Act sought to achieve this by making it illegal to form a joint stock company and to create transferable shares without a grant of legal authority, either by Act of Parliament or by Royal Charter. In other words, unincorporated companies with transferable shares were prohibited, and only incorporated companies and common law partnerships were allowed to continue. These companies had joint stock, which divided ownership into units, but in order to escape the prohibitions of the Bubble Act there would be some nominal restriction on the transfer of stock.2® As with earlier companies based on the joint stock principle, owners of shares in deed of settlement companies had little, if any, involve- ment in management of the company, which was conducted by a managing committee. ‘The two branches of the law were thus in conflict over the new business unit, and against the common law’s attitude that there was no such thing as an unincorporated joint stock company, was the definite development of an institution somewhere between partnership and incorporated company, under Chancery jurisdiction22 today. that corporations were created by charter or statute so that people could pursue a joint, profit-making interest for some public purpose. The grant of corpo- ‘The two branches of the law were thus in conflict over the new business unit, and against the common law’s attitude that there was no such thing as an unincorporated joint stock company, was the definite development of an institution somewhere between partnership and incorporated company, under Chancery jurisdiction22 Another point of distinction between companies established by deed of settlement and those given incorporated status deserves emphasis. We have seen that corporations were created by charter or statute so that people could pursue a joint, profit-making interest for some public purpose. The grant of corporate status, together with the attendant privileges, was clothed with the rhetoric of public responsibility2 In contrast, the deed of settlement company developed as a vehicle for organising and promoting private interests. This shift in perspective, from public to private purposes, is important in the development of modern corporate culture. As we noted earlier in this chapter (see Section 1.10), it has implications for arguments about the appropriate degree of state regulation of corporations. During the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, there was periodic repetition of the speculative fervour that marked the demise of the South Sea Bubble. As one historian describes it:

Prospectuses routinely contained false or exaggerated claims about a new company’s subscribed capital, investors, and managers. Respectable securities brokers were hired, ‘on very tempting rates of commission, to trade in bubble company scrip. Company accounts were faked and suppressed. Dividends were declared from capital accounts. Sham directors held lavish entertainments at the sham offices of sham companies. Alll of this and more was done to create the illusion of the ‘bona fide character of the undertaking’! Early in the nineteenth century, the prohibitions in the Bubble Act were enforced sporadically.22 At the same time, the use of the deed of settlement company was gaining acceptance. Faced with widespread avoidance, the Act was repealed in 1825. At this time, there were three types of association in use: the common law partnership, the unincorporated joint stock company formed by deed of settlement, and the incorporated company formed by charter or special Act of Parliament. Of these, the first two were the most numerous. In the period between the repeal of the Bubble Act and the 1840s, the idea of a company structured around the joint stock principle continued to gain acceptance. There were many factors behind this.22 Among these were the continued availability of this form of organisation via charter or special Act of Parliament, the extension of certain joint stock privileges to provincial banks (such as the right to sue and be sued in the name of a public officer), and a continuing interest in a form of partnership which would allow for non-active investing partners to limit their liability to the extent of their contribution24 According to one legal historian, in this period: [T]he economic group, focused through a joint stock fund, had established itself as the most important of developing business forms; its existence was no longer questioned although its powers and immunities were2= At the same time, continuing evidence of fraudulent company promotions led to a growing belief that some form of legal regulation was necessary. During this period, calls for legislative action were catalysed by publicity surrounding widespread business failure and malpractice.“ This was a time when there was debate about the need for, and policies to be pursued in, the legal regulation of companies and corporations. One issue which figured prominently in public debate was whether members of a joint stock company should be permitted to limit their liability to creditors of the company. The idea that each member's liability would be limited to the amount which he or she contributed to the joint stock fund was not new. Members of unincorporated joint stock companies could attempt to limit their liability in a number of ways; for example, by inserting a provision to this effect in contracts with third parties. It was also common for deeds of settlement to contain such clauses, although there were doubts whether this statement would be effective unless it was also included within the contract with a creditor22 While the main impetus behind the emergence of the corporation continued to be the advantage of the joint stock arrangement, in the early nineteenth century there was discussion about the extent to which the law should sanction limited liability as an intrinsic feature of joint stock enterprise. On the one hand, the group form of commercial enterprise was necessary for large-scale economic activity. Limited liability was an incentive for investors to risk their money in these group enterprises. On the other hand, because of their scale, group enterprises had greater potential to put the interests of creditors at risk. As recognised by Adam Smith and Karl Marx, non-owning managers could easily be tempted to trade beyond the means of their company. John Stuart Mill's reply was that creditors were capable of taking care of themselves, and that laws which impeded limited liability were unduly protective and paternalistic. Mill argued that, provided limited liability associations were required to publicise their accounts, creditors should be left to make their own judgments about whether to deal with a particular company.22 This debate about whether the primary concern of company law should be for members and investors or for the interests of creditors has been a continuing theme in corporate law reform. Bubble. As one historian describes it:

During the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, there was periodic repetition of the speculative fervour that marked the demise of the South Sea Bubble. As one historian describes it: [T]he economic group, focused through a joint stock fund, had established itself as the most important of developing business forms; its existence was no longer questioned although its powers and immunities were= After 1825, we see the beginnings of a distinct legal regime for the unincorporated joint stock company. The Trading Companies Act 183422 allowed for some of the advantages of incorporation to be granted to such bodies by way of Letters Patent. It appears that this Act, which was administered by the courts of common law, was regarded as too inflexible by comparison with the deed of settlement company. A Board of Trade report on the law of partnership in 1837 recommended that partnerships should be limited to 15 members.“? Partnerships with more than this number would need to register a deed of settlement. Presumably, this was to avoid the difficulties of enforcing obligations on a partnership with a large and fluctuating membership“! However, the British Parliament decided not to give express recognition to the equitable form of joint stock company, preferring to adhere to the common law classifications of incorporated company and partnership. The response to the 1837 report was simply to revise the existing legislation. The Chartered Companies Act 18372 continued to allow for specific privileges to be granted to companies by way of Letters Patent.

## 1.30.05 The Joint Stock Companies Act 1844

The 1837 report was followed by what has proven to be an enduring feature of corporate law reform—the convening of a Parliamentary Committee to examine and report on the issues.42 Chaired by William Gladstone (President of the Board of Trade), this Committee’s recommendations led to the enactment of the Joint Stock Companies Act 1844.4 This Act ‘for the Registration, Incorporation and Regulation of Joint Stock Companies’ was the first step towards establishing a system of company law based on legislative regulation, rather than common law doctrine.“2 The Act signalled the merging of the joint stock fund as a form of economic activity with the idea of incorporation. The development of company law became separate from that of partnership, as the legislative branch of government assumed a role alongside the courts of equity. Drawing on the Gladstone Committee's recommendations, the 1844 Act was based upon two elements that continue to underpin contemporary corporate regulation: public registration of companies and public financial accountability. First, the Act introduced the process of incorporation by registration. All newly created deed of settlement companies with more than 25 members, or with shares freely transferable without the consent of all the members, were required to be registered with the Board of Trade, a government department. Registration involved the filing of documents, including the deed of settlement, with the Registrar and payment of the appropriate fee. The registration requirement was intended to act as a form of public notification about the creation of the company. This process of incorporation by administrative procedure automatically conferred certain legal privileges on the company. For example, the company could sue and be sued and hold and dispose of property in its own right. This shift from close supervision of each instance of incorporation by tailor-made charter or Act of Parliament to a general system of incorporation by registration marks one of the major steps towards the present system of company regulation. The second significant element in the Act was a set of requirements concerning the publicity of the company’s financial affairs. These were aimed at the growing public concern with corporate fraud. When he introduced the legislation, Gladstone argued that ‘publicity is all that is necessary. Show up roguery and it is harmless’4® The Act required registered companies to prepare annual balance sheets for audit. Both the balance sheet and the auditor's report were to be filed with the Registrar of Companies. It is interesting to note that despite the grant of separate legal status to each newly incorporated body, the 1844 Act used the term ‘company’ as a collective noun; various sections in the Act, when referring to obligations imposed on the company, used the words ‘they’ and ‘them: This suggests that the company was still regarded essentially as a collection of individuals rather than as an entity in its own right42 We will see in the next chapter that this conceptualisation continues to have important implications for corporate regulation. The 1844 Act did not provide for limited liability of members as a consequence of incorporation. Instead, each shareholder in the company was liable for the company’s debts. Because the purpose of the Act was to protect the public rather than to offer inducements to incorporate, limited liability was outside the purview of this legislative change. However, the 1844 Act was amended in 1855 with the consequence that limited liability became an entitlement consequent to incorporation of a company.® The liability of a shareholder was limited to the amount, if any, which was owed to the company for his or her shares. As a prerequisite to obtaining this privilege, the Act provided that by various means the company must advertise the fact that its members had the benefit of limited liability. The inclusion of the word ‘Limited’ after the company’s name was made mandatory, and the deed of settlement had to state that the compa-

## 1.30.05 The Joint Stock Companies Act 1844

Itis interesting to note that despite the grant of separate legal status to each newly incorporated body, the 1844 Act used the term ‘company’ as a collective noun; various sections in the Act, when referring to obligations imposed on the company, used the words ‘they’ and ‘them: This suggests that the company was still regarded essentially as a collection of individuals rather than as an entity in its own right.42 We will see in the next chapter that this conceptualisation continues to have important implications for corporate regulation. The 1844 Act did not provide for limited liability of members as a consequence of incorporation. Instead, each shareholder in the company was liable for the company’s debts. Because the purpose of the Act was to protect the public rather than to offer inducements to incorporate, limited liability was outside the purview of this legislative change. However, the 1844 Act was amended in 1855 with the consequence that limited liability became an entitlement consequent to incorporation of a company.® The liability of a shareholder was limited to the amount, if any, which was owed to the company for his or her shares. As a prerequisite to obtaining this privilege, the Act provided that by various means the company must advertise the fact that its members had the benefit of limited liability. The inclusion of the word ‘Limited’ after the company’s name was made mandatory, and the deed of settlement had to state that the company was formed with limited liability. The 1855 Act was an amendment to the existing legislation and so the benefits of limited liability were restricted to the large deed of settlement companies with which the 1844 Act was concerned. Limited liability had not yet been sanctioned for smaller business operations. Even with this restricted scope, the 1855 legislation met strong opposition. Much of this condemnation was expressed in highly moralistic terms. For example, an article published in the Law Times in 1858 argued ‘it would appear as if the immunity it provides for dishonesty, by exempting men from liability to pay their debts and perform their contracts and make reparation for their wrongs, taints the moral character of those who adopt it’42

## 1.30.10 The Joint Stock Companies Act 1856

In 1856, the Acts of 1844 and 1855 were consolidated by the Joint Stock Companies Act 185622 This Act put in place many of the features that are found in contemporary corporations legislation.

## 1.30.10 The Joint Stock Companies Act 1856

The 1856 Act introduced the process of incorporation by registration of a Memorandum of Association. This document contained basic information about the company, such as its name and the purposes for which it was to be incorporated. Along with this registration document, each company was required to have Articles of Association. The Act supplied a model set of Articles (or regulations) which could be adopted by any company. The Articles originated from the deeds of settlement which had been required by the previous legislation, and the model provisions were based upon widely used precedents. Today, the Memorandum and the Articles are reflected in the modern company constitution and in the ‘replaceable rules’ found in the Corporations Act; this is explained in Chapter 5 of this book. In the 1856 Act, the minimum number of people necessary to incorporate was reduced from 25 to 7. The legislation required that partnerships of more than 20 persons must be incorporated under the Act in order to carry on business. Limited liability was available on terms to be specified in each company’s Memorandum and Articles of Association. Interestingly, what was missing from the legislation was the previous emphasis on publicity of company financial affairs. For example, the 1856 Act contained no requirements relating to audited accounts. These provisions were included in the model set of Articles, which did not require that the information be filed with the Registrar. The 1856 Act continued the idea that there was no separation between the company and its members. Section 3, for example, permitted seven or more persons to ‘form themselves into an incorporated company’, suggesting that the company was still regarded as co-extensive with the people who formed it. The philosophy behind this legislation was expressed clearly by Robert Lowe, Vice-President of the Board of Trade and an ardent supporter of the Act: ‘The principle is the freedom of contract, and the right of unlimited association—the right of people to make what contracts they please on behalf of themselves, whether those contracts may appear to the Legislature beneficial or not, as long as they do not commit fraud, or otherwise act contrary to the general policy of the lawS! In short, the legislation was built upon the liberal philosophy that individuals, not governments, are best placed and motivated to protect their own interests.
## 1.30.15 The Companies Act 1862

Several consolidating Acts followed, culminating in the Companies Act 1862°2 which was the model for the first company statutes in Australia. Three aspects Several consolidating Acts followed, culminating in the Companies Act 186252 which was the model for the first company statutes in Australia. Three aspects of this Act are worth mentioning. First, the wording of the incorporation section revealed a shift in how the idea of the company was understood. Section 6 provided that persons could ‘form an incorporated company; indicating that the company was now regarded as something distinct from its members. Second, the Act continued to relegate provisions about accounts and audits to the model Articles of Association. Publicity of financial affairs had not reemerged as a major public concern. Finally, the Act was considerably longer than previous Acts, with 212 sections compared to 116 in the 1856 Act. Corporate legislation was becoming a more detailed and technical matter. In a number of ways, the 1862 legislation continued the laissez-faire philosophy that had underpinned the 1856 Act. There is evidence that despite this philosophy and the reduced minimum membership requirement, this Act was not intended for use by sole traders or the smaller private partnerships. The privileges of corporate status were aimed instead at joint stock enterprises—the nineteenth century equivalent of modern public companies.>2 There are different interpretations of the rationale behind this policy.4 One view is that the legislation between 1856 and 1862 was designed to serve the interests of the English investor class to stop the flight of investment and incorporations from England to Europe. Another interpretation is that the legislation embodied a permissive attitude towards the creation and operation of companies and had the effect of shifting the risk of company failure onto creditors, such as banks and large merchants. This worked to the advantage of the ‘middling class, providing a device to protect them from the risk of bankruptcy and debtors’ prison and encouraging their participation in economic growth. Historical research*= shows that even by the mid-1880s, the unincorporated partnership was still the most widely used form of associated commercial activity. This was due in part to the continuing ambivalence towards incorporation and limited liability. By the early 1900s, this picture had changed dramatically. By then, contrary to the intention of the early legislators, the heaviest users of the companies legislation were sole proprietors and small businesses. What may have prompted the dramatic growth in the use of the limited company form by small partnerships was the attraction of limited liability in the context of the economic Long Depression from 1873 to 1896. This factor, combined with the increasing ease of incorporation, meant that incorporations of small firms soon outstripped joint stock company incorporations. Gradually, the term ‘private company’ came into use to describe what were little more than incorporated partnerships. An event of key importance in the process of recognising private companies was the case of Salomon v Salomon & Co Ltd5® which was litigated between 1895 and 1896, being decided finally by the House of Lords. As will be seen in Chapter 3, this is cited as the case which confirmed and approved the concept of the one-person limited liability company22 ZU persons must be Incorporatea under tne ACT In order to carry on business. Limited lability was avaliable on terms to be specined in eacn company’s Memorandum and Articles of Association. Interestingly, what was missing from the legislation was the previous emphasis on publicity of company financial affairs. For example, the 1856 Act contained no requirements relating to audited accounts. These provisions were included in the model set of Articles, which did not require that the information be filed with the Registrar. We now turn our attention to the Australian history of corporate regulation. We start by emphasising two features of the historical developments described earlier. First, the development of company law shifted away from a reliance on judicial decisions towards an increasingly legislated structure. Although the role of the courts remained important, by the late nineteenth century the courts were being displaced as the main regulatory focus by an ever-growing regulatory bureaucracy. During the nineteenth century, the practical significance of the companies legislation had changed. Initially, the legislature had offered incorporation as a way of facilitating the large-scale raising of public funds by joint stock companies. By the end of the century, most companies on the register were small affairs hoping to escape the disadvantages of partnership law and gain the benefit of limited liability. Company law had expanded to encompass large commercial investment-based enterprise, small one-person businesses, and non-profit organisations such as clubs and charities.22 The second feature to emphasise is that private and public companies, which today are treated as two aspects of the same concept, had different historical origins. Public companies developed from the joint stock companies via the deed of settlement companies. In the process, the basic legal elements of modern corporations were put into place. Private companies joined the process later on, as sole proprietors and partnerships took advantage of incorporation laws and rapidly became the numerically dominant species of corporation. The history of company law in Britain overlaps with the early decades of the British colonisation of Australia. However, the issues that underpinned developments in British corporate history were not simply echoed in Australia. The picture is more complex than this. Certainly, Australian corporate history continued the trend towards the increased use of the corporate form in all areas of commercial life. But the Australian context, involving the transformation of a penal colony into a pastoral economy and then into a bureaucratised, industrial nation, provided its own set of influences on the development of corporate regulation. It would be misleading to assume that the history of corporate law in Australia simply picked up where British history left off. We also acknowledge that while our focus is on the development of corporate law in its legislative and judicial contexts, there was—and continues to be—a very different understanding of ideas about groups, property and ownership among First Nations people in this country. In Australia, the rise of liberal political ideas shaped attitudes towards corporate regulation. However, liberalism in Australia demonstrated different emphases to Britain. The ideas of the English jurist and philosopher Jeremy Bentham were particularly influential ©2 Conditions in the first century of white settlement, such as the great distances between population groups and the absence of pre-existing institutional structures, laid the foundations for a system of government that was more interventionist than that in Britain A particular consequence was a heavy emphasis on legislation as a source of legal rules and method of economic regulation. These themes became particularly important with regard to an issue that did not trouble business people or law-makers in Britain: the divergences between the corporate legislation passed by the different States, and the resulting drive for unified legislation with national application.

## 1.40.05 Small beginnings: 1788-1850s

Early corporate activity in the colonies was dominated by the English-based deed of settlement companies, companies with Royal Charters, and companies incorporated by a special Act of Parliament. There were practical commercial reasons for this, since the early colony was closely allied to British needs and to the British supply of labour and capital. The pastoral boom in the 1830s was financed mainly by British capital, and British banking companies established themselves in New South Wales. The first local company to be established was the Bank of New South Wales, which started as a joint stock company under a charter granted by Governor Macquarie in 1817.52 Because of doubts over the validity of its original charter, and because of shareholder unrest about the bank’s performance, the bank adopted a deed of settlement in 1828, giving it the legal status of a partnership, with the consequence of unlimited liability of members. In 1850, the bank formed a new deed of settlement and took advantage of new legislation which incorporated the company.

## 1.40.10 Boom and Depression: 1850s-1890s

This was a period in which the colonial economies expanded rapidly, spurred on by the gold rushes of the 1850s. This economic growth culminated in the great boom of the 1880s, closely followed by the depression in the 1890s. The number of company incorporations increased across these four decades, although historical research shows that many companies operating in Australia, especially large financial enterprises, continued to prefer English registration The Victorian gold rush in the 1850s prompted the creation of many new public companies concerned with mining, waterworks and other activities associated with the development of the gold fields. However, it was not until the boom period of the 1880s that there was a dramatic increase in the number of new companies. This was due to a growth of investment in speculative land developments which were funded largely by a continuing inflow of capital from Britain This land boom was especially marked in Victoria, with many leading financial and political figures being involved in company incorporations, particularly building societies and the ‘land banks’ The promise of easy money offered by these companies attracted many small-time investors, spurred on by the belief that ‘it was impossible to lose money by “investing” in land's The rise in incorporations is demonstrated by company registration figures: in 1875 there were 13 company registrations in New South Wales and 27 in Victoria; by 1888 (the peak year of the boom) these figures had risen to 227 and 342 respectively. The depression in the early 1890s resulted in many companies being wound up, and in 1890, New South Wales saw 122 registrations while there were only 64 in Victoria.©° Nevertheless, despite the effects of the depression, this was a period during which the corporate form gained increased acceptance in the conduct of economic activity. The colonies, and subsequently the states, had a strong reliance on British legislation for regulating commercial activity until well into the twentieth company’s directors) at a highly inflated price? The legislation provided few mechanisms whereby potential investors might be able to discover the existence of the directors’ interests. 2 There were no legislative requirements for companies to have their accounts audited, although it was common practice for audits to be conducted. The growth of speculative mining ventures led to the first instance in which colonial legislators departed from English precedent in companies legislation 2= The absence of effective administration of the existing English-model legislation had led to a practice known as ‘dummying, whereby investors would obtain partly-paid shares in a mining company under a false name. The aim was to avoid having to pay any further amounts owing on the shares if the company either made a later call on the shareholder or it was wound up. This practice was possible because of the administrative difficulties in maintaining the accuracy of share registers. Hoping to deter this practice and encourage investment in speculative mining ventures, Victoria introduced the Companies (Mining) Act 1871 which permitted the incorporation of ‘no-liability companies: In effect, this legislation simply accepted the consequences of dummying by providing that shareholders who did not respond to a call from the company forfeited their shares without further liability to the company. Furthermore, if the company became insolvent, shareholders were not liable to the company’s creditors for any amounts unpaid on their shares.

## 1.40.15 Early moves towards uniformity: 1890s-1930s

Following the economic crash in the 1890s, there was growing acceptance of the need for more direct governmental regulation of economic activity. As noted already, the depression involved the collapse of many companies. In 1893, for example, 13 banks were closed within a six-week period. Between 1891 and 1893, 54 banks (including ‘land banks’) were closed.2° As is frequently the case, the collapses revealed evidence of fraud and malpractice. In Victoria: the falsifying of balance sheets, the payment of dividends from non-existent profits, and the publication of misleadingly optimistic forecasts, were among the shocking features of the crash. Men who were widely known and trusted, who had been knighted by the Queen, who occupied the highest political and business positions, took leading parts in the manipulations.Z Although the effects of the crash differed across the country, during the 1890s all states revised their company law statutes. In Victoria, where the land boom had been most pronounced, the magnitude of the depression and the associated corporate collapses focused attention on the need for a thorough reform of corporations legislation. The result was the Companies Act 1896. The inspiration for this Act came from many sources. Not surprisingly, existing English legislation was referred to, as well as legislation in New Zealand and Canada.“ A further source was the recommendations of the Davey Committee in England. That Committee's 1895 report on joint stock companies was concerned principally with strengthening the accounting and audit requirements of the existing legislation.22 Interestingly, although these aspects of the report were adopted immediately in Victoria, the response in England was much slower. It took nearly 25 years before all the recommendations were acted upon. The new Victorian legislation introduced many features that are now standard in Australian corporate law. Companies were required to maintain proper books of account from which an annual balance sheet was to be prepared. The Act provided for compulsory annual audits of the balance sheet, with the audit to be lodged with the Registrar and provided to shareholders. Statutory duties were prescribed for directors and auditors®? and there were new provisions dealing with the winding up of companies. The passage of this legislation through the Victorian Parliament was marked by fierce debate between politicians who saw the necessity of controlling fraud and those whose concern was to encourage business activity. On the one hand, the following statement from the Parliamentary Debates expressed a sentiment which continues to be influential: ‘The blessings of associated capital are great ... but at the same time we cannot but recognise that in the name of legitimate enterprise are perpetrated most terrible frauds, bringing widespread ruin upon people ®! On the other hand, the conservatively controlled Victorian Legislative Council forced many changes to the original Bill. One of the most significant was the creation of a new category of company that was exempt from the new accounting and auditing provisions. This category, the proprietary company, was the equivalent of the English private company, although English legislation made no comparable provision until 1908. As originally defined, a proprietary company was limited to a maximum of 25 members and was required to add the words ‘proprietary limited’ to its name£2 The problems of adequate administration and enforcement continued under the new legislation. The states allocated the task of corporate regulation to different branches On the other hand, the conservatively controlled Victorian Legislative Council forced many changes to the original Bill. One of the most significant was the creation of a new category of company that was exempt from the new accounting and auditing provisions. This category, the proprietary company, was the equivalent of the English private company, although English legislation made no comparable provision until 1908. As ori inally defined, a proprietary company was limited to a maximum of 25 members and was required to add the words ‘proprietary limited’ to its name£2 of their bureaucracies, resulting in noticeable variations in company regulation between the states. According to McQueen's research, the New South Wales Registrar-General’s Department was strict in enforcing the provisions of the Act. One consequence of this was that the practice of dummying was not as prevalent in New South Wales, and this State did not follow the Victorian expedient of passing ‘no liability’ legislation=4 The disparity in approaches to company law enforcement between the different states not only created confusion for business people, it also created opportunities for fraud. These factors resulted in a growing number of calls from the business community for a uniform scheme of corporations legislation and administration to apply nationally. 2> The question of uniform legislation was debated during the Constitutional Conventions held between 1891 and 1897. McQueen identifies two competing concerns in this debate.£¢ On the one hand, Sir Samuel Griffith supported uniformity between state legislation in order to reduce confusion in dealing with the large number of English-registered companies. On the other hand, the large number of company collapses in the 1890s depression gave added support to calls for national Commonwealth legislation. The significant differences of opinion on this issue are a reason for the resulting ambiguity in the wording of the Commonwealth's power over corporations, found in s 51(xx) of the Australian Constitution. Section 51(xx) provides that the Commonwealth Parliament shall have power to make laws with respect to foreign corporations, and trading or financial corporations formed within the limits of the Commonwealth. This section has two possible interpretations, each having different implications for any attempt to introduce a national scheme of corporations legislation. One interpretation concludes that the Commonwealth is restricted to legislating with respect to corporations that are already incorporated, either overseas or in one of the states. This interpretation means that the Commonwealth Parliament has no power under s 51(xx) to incorporate companies, hampering the possibility of effective national corporations legislation. An alternative reading of the section contrasts the words ‘formed within the limits of the Commonwealth’ with ‘foreign corporations, thereby giving the Commonwealth the capacity to legislate for company incorporations. As we will see later, the High Court has opted for the first of these interpretations. 2 In the years immediately following Federation, the interest shown by the Commonwealth in achieving national corporations legislation encountered opposition from powerful interest groups. Commercial and professional bodies were suspicious of the Commonwealth's intentions, particularly in a political climate in which support for the new Labor Party and more interventionist economic regulation was growing.£2 Those interest groups opposed to national legislation found support in the 1909 case of Huddart, Parker & Co Ltd v Moorehead (‘Huddart Parker),22 the first oc- casion on casion on which the High Court examined s 51(xx). The case involved a challenge to provisions of a Commonwealth restrictive trade practices statute. While those provisions were held invalid by a majority of four to one, the Court was unanimous in its view that s 51(xx) confined the Commonwealth's legislative power to corporations that had already come into existence. This inability to legislate for the incorporation of companies proved to be an effective bar to entry by the Commonwealth into the field of corporate regulation for nearly a century. Into the twentieth century, each state maintained and revised its own corporations legislation, together with its own system of companies administration. During the early 1930s, there was renewed discussion on the need for federal corporations legislation. Not surprisingly, this was thwarted by constitutional considerations and so attention turned towards the possibility of uniform legislation across the states. Even though this failed, the 1930s was a period of considerable activity in company law reform, with New South Wales, South Australia and Queensland each passing new Acts, largely based upon the Companies Act 1929 (UK). It is worth noting that the category of proprietary company was introduced into New South Wales legislation at this time; Victorian legislation had made similar provision in 1896.22 Inevitably, the different state Acts and administrative practices continued to diverge.

## 1.40.20 The first uniform legislation: 1950s-1980

The Australian economy entered a phase of relative prosperity during the 1950s following the Second World War. This economic growth highlighted the differences in state legislation and administration which made corporate activity on a national scale quite cumbersome; for example, there were different registration requirements in each state. Once more, support was expressed for the idea of all state corporations legislation being brought into line. In 1959, the State and the Commonwealth Attorneys-General met to devise a method of bringing uniformity to the legislation. The result was the Uniform Companies Acts, which, with various modifications, were adopted by all states and territories between 1961 and 1962. The Uniform Companies Acts, which became operative between July 1962 and July 1963, were based largely on the Companies Act 1958 (Vic). Various other sources were consulted, including the Model Business Corporation Act from the United States; the 1945 report of the Cohen Committee on company law amendment in the United Kingdom;2! and the report of a Commission of Inquiry on company law in Ghana prepared by leading UK company law academic, Professor Gower.22 The uniformity produced by this intergovernmental agreement in the early 1960s was tenuous. First, the changes to the legislation were not matched by administrative uniformity. The various uniform Acts continued to be administered by the different state bureaucracies, each of which exhibited different patterns in administrative practice and

## 1.40.20 The first uniform legislation: 1950s-1980
quality. Second, the legislative uniformity was gradually eroded during the 1960s as different states began to amend their versions of the uniform corporations legislation in response to local developments in the companies and securities field. The 1960s began with a number of spectacular corporate collapses and ended with a period of intense investment speculation associated with the nickel mining boom between 1968 and 1972. The company collapses occurred mainly in the retail and property development industries.22 It may be that some of these collapses occurred because business people had not adjusted their management practices and skills to meet the relative prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s.%4 In other cases, the problems were caused by the desire to exploit that prosperity for fraudulent purposes. The Victorian Government appointed special investigators to report on three of the largest collapses involving the two retail groups headed by Reid Murray Holdings Ltd and Cox Brothers (Australia) Ltd, and the Stanley Korman property development and finance empire which operated in New South Wales and Victoria. The reports revealed instances of corporate behaviour and malpractice that have continued to occur in Australian corporate life.25 Key factors included inactive or incompetent directors; selfinterested senior managers who were able to control their boards; inadequate or apathetic supervision by auditors, debenture trustees and regulators; and the growing complexity of company structures. The dramatic boom and crash in the mining industry at the end of the 1960s resulted in serious attention being paid to securities laws at both state and federal levels. The flurry of speculation in mineral securities attracted a large number of small and first-time investors who were spurred on by the flotation of a great number of public companies, many of them highly suspect. Most prominent in this speculation fever was a mining company called Poseidon NL, which became a household name in Australia for a short time between 1969 and 1970. The market value of shares in this company rose from below $1 in September 1969 to a high of $280 in February 1970. The magnitude of this jump, and the short period over which it occurred, gives some idea of the intensity of market activity at the time. In 1970, New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia each enacted uniform legislation to regulate the securities industry. The legislation provided for the licensing of investment advisers and stockbrokers, as well as prohibiting various improper practices in the share market. From the outset, there were significant differences between the Acts and once again the uniformity was illusory. 2° In March of the same year, Labor Senator Lionel Murphy, later a judge of the High Court of Australia, succeeded in establishing a Senate Select Committee to examine the securities industry and the operations of the stock exchanges in the wake of the excesses of the mining boom. The Committee became known by the name of its chair, Senator Peter Rae, and its major term of reference was to ‘inquire into and report upon the desirability and feasibility of establishing a securities and exchange commission by the Commonwealth’Z The Rae Committee’ met between 1970 and 1974, producing three interim reports and a massive fourvolume final report in 1974 (‘the Rae Report’). In one estimation, the final report was: [T]he first (and only) major document in this country which analysed the workings of the securities market, which examined problems encountered by the regulators, both official and unofficial of that market during a time of extreme pressure and which posed solutions to those problems.28 The Rae Report recommended the creation of both national securities legislation and a national body to regulate the securities market, similar to the Securities and Exchange Commission in the United States. The Report argued that only a national regulatory body could ‘eliminate the variation in administrative practice and standardise the quality of administrative action’ in the securities industry. 22 At the same time as the Rae Committee was conducting its hearings, the High Court and the federal government were each involved in other developments. Towards the end of 1971, in Strickland v Rocla Concrete Pipes Ltd (‘Concrete Pipes’)!°°, the High Court held that the earlier decision in Huddart Parker should be overruled insofar as it relied on the now discredited reserved powers doctrine. Although the Concrete Pipes decision did not expressly deal with the power of the Commonwealth to incorporate companies under s 51(xx), the door was nevertheless open again for the federal government to push for national legislation. Before the Rae Committee's final report was published, the federal Labor Government had prepared its own draft scheme for national legislation to regulate the securities industry and the public issuing of shares. The Corporations and Securities Industry Bill 1974 (Cth) drew on aspects of the existing state securities industry statutes as well as overseas legislation. The narrow focus of the Bill assumed that the states would continue to legislate for the creation of companies and their internal affairs. However, the Bill lapsed when the Whitlam Labor Government was dismissed in November 1975. Coincidentally, with this attempt at federal securities legislation, the three states which were then controlled by Liberal-Country party coalition governments (New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland) entered into their own agreement to establish the Interstate Corporate Affairs Commission (ICAC) in 1974. Western Australia joined this agreement in 1975. The objectives of the ICAC were to promote greater uniformity in the companies and securities legislation Coincidentally, with this attempt at federal securities legislation, the three states which were then controlled by Liberal-Country party coalition governments (New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland) entered into their own agreement to establish the Interstate Corporate Affairs Commission (ICAC) in 1974. Western Australia joined this agreement in 1975. The objectives of the ICAC were to promote greater uniformity in the companies and securities legislation and to establish common standards and coordination in administering the law. The ICAC was set up to achieve this. Each of these states duly amended its 1961 Uniform Companies Act to produce uniform legislation. In addition, a uniform Securities Industry Act was drafted and passed in 1975 in each of the four ICAC states. The 1975 legislation was similar to the 1970 securities legislation, but this time with greater uniformity. Meanwhile, in the federal arena, the newly elected Liberal-Country party coalition government was initiating its own attempts to produce uniform national legislation, but met strong opposition from the smaller states. Their concerns focused on their need to attract capital, by way of company registrations, and any federal interference was seen as an undue impediment." Eventually, however, the state resistance was worn down. An agreement on a nationally uniform scheme was reached in 1978.

## 1.40.25 The co-operative scheme: 1980-90

The objectives of the co-operative scheme were to promote commercial certainty, reduce business costs, achieve greater efficiency in the capital markets, and maintain the confidence of investors through suitable measures for their protection. The goals were to be achieved through uniform legislation that would be administered uniformly by the different state corporate affairs bureaucracies. Unlike previous attempts at uniformity, the co-operative scheme involved the Commonwealth government as well as the six state governments (and, from 1986, the Northern Territory). The basis of the arrangement between the eight governments was a Formal Agreement, signed in December 1978. Uniformity was achieved by an ‘application of laws’ mechanism. The Commonwealth passed the initial legislation in a form that was agreed upon by all states and the Northern Territory. Because of doubts about the Commonwealth's constitutional jurisdiction, this legislation was expressed to apply only in the Australian Capital Territory. Each state and the Northern Territory then agreed to pass legislation that applied the Australian Capital Territory legislation as a state or territory law. The scheme attempted a compromise between national legislation enacted by the Commonwealth, and uniform legislation enacted by the states, neither of which had met with success. The main pieces of legislation in the scheme were the Companies Act 1981 (Cth), dealing with general matters of incorporation, company affairs, and winding tha Camnanine (Nea inn af Charae) Act TON (Cth) dnalina with talaaunee: tha Cactviting Inductns Act 1000 (Cth\ sathich cavinead tha enc ine inclusctess

## 1.40.25 The co-operative scheme: 1980-90

The main pieces of legislation in the scheme were the Companies Act 1981 (Cth), dealing with general matters of incorporation, company affairs, and winding up; the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980 (Cth), dealing with takeovers; the Securities Industry Act 1980 (Cth), which covered the securities industry and the stock market; the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980 (Cth); and, later, the Futures Industry Act 1986 (Cth), which regulated the newly developed trading in futures contracts. For convenience, each Act became known as the Companies Code, the Securities Industry Code etc; while, in each state, the legislation was referred to as the Companies [name of State] Code. The monitoring of the co-operative scheme and the regulation of the legislation involved three levels of administration, each with different responsibilities. At the top was the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities, established by the Formal Agreement. The Council was constituted by one minister (in practice, the Attorney-General) from each of the governments who were parties to the agreement. The Council's function was to review the formulation and operation of the legislation and its administration. Any amendments to the legislation required approval by the Ministerial Council. At the next level was the National Companies and Securities Commission (NCSC). This was the first national body in Australia established to regulate the companies and securities area, and its creation owed much to the recommendations of the earlier Rae Report. It was established by the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979 (Cth) and was responsible to the Ministerial Council for the general administration and development of policy in the co-operative scheme. The Formal Agreement required the NCSC, as far as possible, to decentralise its functions, via delegation to the already existing state and territory Corporate Affairs Commissions or Offices. These state bodies formed the third level of administration, and were responsible for the day-to-day operation of the scheme. Under the scheme, these bodies were formally responsible to the NCSC for the way in which delegated power was carried out. The state bodies were bureaucracies funded and staffed by, and therefore subject to the will of, the different state and territory governments. An important advantage of the co-operative scheme was that a company trading in more than one participating jurisdiction did not have to lodge documents in any place other than its jurisdiction of incorporation. The scheme removed the need for companies to register in jurisdictions outside of the home jurisdiction, and foreign companies needed only to register in one of the participating jurisdictions to enter the ambit of the scheme. The viability of the scheme depended ultimately upon the willingness of the states to cooperate, and on the capacity of the NCSC to administer the legislation effectively. In 1987, the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs published a report on the co-operative scheme which identified three problems. First, there was no direct ministerial responsibility and accountability to federal parliament. The NCSC was responsible only to the Ministerial Council which was not responsible to any other person or body. Under the Formal Agreement, any legislative reforms were decided by the The viability of the scheme depended ultimately upon the willingness of the states to cooperate, and on the capacity of the NCSC to administer the legislation effectively. In 1987, the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs published a report on the co-operative scheme which identified three problems.122 First, there was no direct ministerial responsibility and accountability to federal parliament. The NCSC was responsible only to the Ministerial Council which was not responsible to any other person or body. Under the Formal Agreement, any legislative reforms were decided by the Ministerial Council and then put to federal parliament for enactment. Although federal parliament retained a right to reject or amend such proposals, this could act as a trigger for any dissenting state to withdraw from the scheme, thereby ending uniformity. Second, the report criticised the administrative duplication and inefficiency in the co-operative scheme, which was administered by nine different bureaucracies (eight corporate affairs offices in the states and territories, and the NCSC). These bureaucracies were all funded and staffed by different governments. The administrative agencies exercised considerable discretion in policing the scheme, and there was evidence of different administrative and enforcement practices between the agencies. There was criticism of chronic under-funding of the NCSC which limited its capacity to investigate and enforce the legislation. The final problem with the co-operative scheme was that due to the ever-present threat of withdrawal by one of the states and the involvement of two levels of government, the scheme had an in-built tendency to produce ‘lowest common denominator’ decision-making. Reform proposals could be effectively vetoed by the threat that one state might withdraw from the scheme. The Committee's report argued there was increasing support for the idea that the Commonwealth should take over responsibility for legislation and administration in the companies and securities field, and the report recommended that accordingly. In September 1987, the Commonwealth Attorney-General announced that the Labor government would seek to assume full constitutional responsibility for companies and securities legislation in Australia. Apart from the Senate Committee's report, the Commonwealth's resolve was strengthened by public disquiet following the share market crash in October 1987 and the subsequent spate of corporate collapses. Once more, the process of corporate law reform received added impetus from an economic crisis. It is important to note that neither at this stage, nor at any of the preceding intergovernmental meetings, did the substance of the corporations legislation receive any serious review. For the most part, attention was restricted to the processes of creating and administering the law The Commonwealth’s plans were opposed by all states except New South Wales (then under a Labor government). The states announced that any Commonwealth legislation would be challenged in the High Court. After a period of intense lobbying and political manoeuvring, the Commonwealth passed the Corporations Act 1989 (Cth) which covered all those areas of companies and securities previously dealt with by the Companies Code, Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Code, Securities Industry Code, and the Futures Industry Code. The Corporations Act 1989 (Cth) was the principal component of a legislative package that included the Australian Securities Commission Act 1989 (Cth), which sought to establish a new national regulatory body in place of the NCSC. Another significant part of the legislative package was the Close Corporations Act 1989 (Cth), which provided for the incorporation of a wholly new form of corporation intended primarily for small business.

## 1.40.30 The Corporations Act 1989 in the High Court

The legislation was passed in May 1989, although it was not proclaimed. One month later, four States—New South Wales (now with a Liberal-National party Government), Western Australia, South Australia and Queensland (which withdrew from the action four months later)—announced a High Court challenge to the legislation. The challenge focused on the constitutional power of the Commonwealth regarding incorporation under s 51(xx) of the Constitution. In February 1990, the High Court handed down its decision in New South Wales v Commonwealth (‘the Incorporation Case’) holding that the Commonwealth Government had no power to legislate for the incorporation of trading and financial corporations. This decision continues to determine the way in which corporations legislation is structured and administered in Australia. A majority of six judges (Deane J dissenting) delivered a single judgment which analysed s 51(xx) in terms of its grammatical construction, previous High Court decisions, and the history of the section. As to the wording of the section, the majority view was that the phrase ‘formed within the limits of the Commonwealth’ refers to corporations that have already been or that shall have been created in Australia. The phrase does not give the Commonwealth the power to incorporate corporations. The majority’s conclusion was that ‘the power conferred by s 51(xx) to make laws with respect to artificial legal persons is not a power to bring into existence the artificial legal persons upon which the laws made under the power can operate’!6 According to the majority, this construction is supported by precedent and history. The majority partially resurrected the Huddart Parker case, which had otherwise been overruled by the Concrete Pipes decision. While the Concrete Pipes case had rejected the use of the reserved powers doctrine in interpreting the section, the majority in the Incorporation case held that this ‘rejection of the decision in Huddart Parker did not extend to the views expressed in that case concerning the power of the Commonwealth to provide for the creation of corporations! Reference was also made to the convention debates that preceded the final drafting of the Constitution. According to the majority, ‘the history of the paragraph plainly indicates that the draftsmen of the provision did not contemplate that it should confer any power otherwise than in respect of corporations already formed’1°8 A further factor referred to by the majority (but not used as a basis for its decision) was the complex set of requirements the Commonwealth had introduced in an attempt to secure a firm constitutional basis for the Act For example, each corporation was required to register an annual statement that it was wholly or substantially engaged in trading or financial activities. Cessation of either of these activities would result in the corporation being wound up. Deane J, in the minority, analysed the wording, precedents, and history of s 51(xx). His Honour was highly critical of the ‘unacceptably narrow and technical construction of those words’ that had found favour with the majority.2 In Deane J's opinion, to distinguish between the power to legislate in respect of corporations formed in Australia and the power to form those corporations makes as much sense as saying that‘a legislative power with respect to locally manu- proach to Huddart Parker. Deane J argued that ‘what was said about incorporation in the majority judgments in Huddart Parker cannot properly be divorced from the reasoning which permeated them. The attempt to restore partial validity to those judgments must be rejected/1!2 While the High Court's decision was limited to the question of incorporation under the Corporations Act 1989, it was recognised that as a result of the decision the entire Act, together with the parallel provisions in the Close Corporations Act 1989, had been rendered inoperative. The High Court’s decision meant that, once more, a political agreement about corporate regulation had to be negotiated between the Commonwealth and state governments.

## 1.40.35 The national scheme: 1991-2001

The result of these negotiations was a new agreement reached in Alice Springs in June 1990 whereby the Commonwealth agreed with the states and the Northern Territory on a new national scheme of uniform companies and securities regulation to be based on the Corporations Act 1989 and the Australian Securities Commission Act 1989. This national scheme of legislation and administration operated from January 1991 until June 2001 when it was replaced by the current ‘referral of powers’ scheme. The national scheme relied on a more elaborate version of the application of laws mechanism that had underpinned the co-operative scheme in the 1980s. The first component of the national scheme was national uniform legislation. The Commonwealth agreed to amend the Corporations Act 1989 in order to limit its application to the Australian Capital Territory. The states and the Northern Territory each passed their own legislation. These Acts (for example, the Corporations (Western Australia) Act 1990 (WA)) applied the substantive and interpretive provisions of the Corporations Act 1989 as the law of each state and Territory jurisdiction, thereby ensuring that the substantive law on corporations applied Australia-wide. Although the corporations legislation was state legislation, it was applied in each state (and the Northern Territory) as if it were Commonwealth legislation. Each state and Territory Act conferred power on Commonwealth authorities and officers to exercise powers within each state and the Northern Territory under Commonwealth laws relating to matters such as administrative review and criminal law. The second component of the scheme was the uniform administration of the legislation. The main responsibility for this lay with the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC), which was the single regulatory body, directly accountable to the Commonwealth Attorney-General12 The third component of the national scheme was a single court system to adjudicate matters arising under the scheme. This was achieved by the cross-vesting of jurisdiction between the state Supreme Courts and the Federal Court. about incorporation in the majority judgments in Huddart Parker cannot properly be divorced from the reasoning which permeated them. The attempt to restore partial validity to those judgments must be rejected/112

## 1.40.35 The national scheme: 1991-2001

One of the curiosities of the national scheme was the structure of the corporations legislation. The Corporations Act 1989 separated the machinery provisions (matters such as cross-vesting of judicial jurisdiction and the power to make regulations) from the substantive provisions of the law. The latter provisions were contained within the Corporations Law, which was located in s 82 of the Corporations Act 1989. Once again, the constitutional validity of the national scheme was called into question by two decisions of the High Court in 1999 and 2000. In June 1999, the cross-vesting arrangements in the scheme were held to be constitutionally invalid by the High Court in Re Wakim; Ex parte McNally; Re Wakim; Ex parte Darvall; Re Brown; Ex parte Amann (‘Re Wakim’)114 A majority of six judges (Kirby J dissenting) held that those parts of the scheme that purported to vest state judicial power in the Federal Court were invalid because ss 75-7 of the Constitution do not permit state jurisdiction to be conferred on the Federal Court. As was noted above, the national scheme of corporate law was based upon state legislation over which, according to Re Wakim, the Federal Court could not be given jurisdiction. The majority judges acknowledged the policy behind the cross-vesting scheme but held it to be irrelevant to the interpretation of the Constitution. Early in his judgment, Gleeson CJ stated that: The cross-vesting legislation has been commended as an example of co-operation between the Parliaments of the Federation. Approval of legislative policy is irrelevant to a judgment as to constitutional validity; just as disapproval of the policy would be irrelevant 144 Asa result of Re Wakim, up until the commencement of the current scheme in 2001, disputes under the corporations legislation had to be heard in the state Supreme Courts, although the Federal Court retained some limited jurisdiction 1S In May 2000, the High Court’s decision in R v Hughes (‘Hughes’)““2 raised significant doubts about the validity of the second component of the national scheme—uniform administration. In a unanimous judgment, the Court held that the Commonwealth cannot authorise its officers or authorities to undertake functions or exercise bowers conferred bv a state law unless those functions or powers are sunnorted bv one or more of the heads of leaislative bower in the In May 2000, the High Court’s decision in R v Hughes (‘Hughes’)"“2 raised significant doubts about the validity of the second component of the national scheme—uniform administration. In a unanimous judgment, the Court held that the Commonwealth cannot authorise its officers or authorities to undertake functions or exercise powers conferred by a state law unless those functions or powers are supported by one or more of the heads of legislative power in the Constitution. In Hughes, the Court concluded that the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions could exercise prosecutorial powers and functions conferred by the Corporations (Western Australia) Act 1990 (WA) because the offences could be related to the Commonwealth's powers concerning external affairs and trade and commerce (Constitution ss 51(i), (xxix). In his judgment, Kirby J commented pointedly on the complex structure of the national scheme legislation: So complex is the interlocking legislation, with fiction piled upon fiction, that it must be doubted whether any of those presenting and enacting it were truly aware of precisely what they were doing. It may be hoped that this and other recent decisions, together with the great national importance of the subject matter of the legislation, will encourage its early reconsideration and the adoption of a simpler constitutional foundation to reduce the perils that are otherwise bound to recur, possibly with serious results& Asa result of Hughes, there were doubts about the capacity of ASIC and other Commonwealth authorities to regulate certain areas of state corporations legislation. In particular, given the High Court’s earlier decision in the Incorporation Case," there were significant doubts about the capacity of ASIC in relation to the incorporation of companies. The decisions in Re Wakim and Hughes signalled the need for yet another revision of the structure of Australian corporate law and regulation, resulting in the current scheme. Before we look at the current scheme of corporate law, it is worth pausing to emphasise the two main parameters of this area of law. Corporate law in Australia is only concerned with the legal relations between certain sets of actors. First, corporate law deals with the rights, interests, duties and liabilities of specific corporate ‘insiders’: the members of the company and its directors. The second parameter concerns relations between the company as a legal actor and certain ‘outsiders’: primarily creditors and others who enter into contracts with companies. Corporate regulators can also be thought of as significant outsiders. It should be remembered that corporate law is not concerned directly with the role of corporations as employers, taxpayers (or tax avoiders), or as economic or environmental actors. Whether this demarcation is defensible is a question that we raise in the next chapter of this book. With these parameters in mind, we can now examine the legal scheme of modern Australian corporate law. The principal enactments in the current national scheme are the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (Cth) (‘ASIC Act’). These Acts commenced operation on 15 July 2001 and were introduced in response to the High Court's decisions in the cases of Re Wakim and Hughes. As was noted in Section 1.40.35 above, the High Court in Re Wakim held that the arrangements in the pre-existing legislation for the cross-vesting of jurisdiction between state and federal courts were invalid. In Hughes, the Court called into question the capacity of Commonwealth officers and authorities to exercise certain powers and functions under the legislation. As a consequence, in December 2000, the Commonwealth, New South Wales and Victoria agreed that the states would pass legislation to refer the necessary powers to the Commonwealth to enable the Commonwealth to enact corporations legislation which would apply in the territories and in all participating states. The remaining states each introduced the necessary legislation in May and June 2001; this is described at Section 1.50.10, below.

## 1.50.05 The constitutional basis of the Corporations Act 2001

The Corporations Act 2001 is Commonwealth legislation intended to apply in the territories and in those states that have agreed to refer power to the Commonwealth. The Act relies on three sources of Commonwealth power, set out in s 3: (1) the Commonwealth's legislative powers in s 51 of the Constitution: these powers do not apply to the Corporations Act insofar as it deals with the registration of companies; (2) the Commonwealth's power to legislate with regard to the territories, found in s 122 of the Constitution: this, together with the legislative powers in s 51, ensures that the legislation applies in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory; (3) the legislative powers that are referred to the Commonwealth by the states under s 51(xxxvii) of the Constitution: these referrals are intended to supply the Commonwealth with the constitutional authority that it does not otherwise have because of the High Court's decisions in New South Wales v Commonwealth and other cases discussed earlier in this chapter. The Commonwealth has the power to legislate with respect to matters that are incidental to the matters referred to the Commonwealth by the states (Constitution s 51(xxxix)). This means that existing Commonwealth legislation, such as the Crimes Act 1914 and the Evidence Act 1995, applies to matters under the Corporations Act. The Commonwealth administrative laws also apply: the Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024; the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977; the Freedom of Information Act 1982; the Ombudsman Act 1976; and the Privacy Act 1988.

## 1.50.10 The referral of powers

The Corporations Act relies, in part, on a referral of power by the states. The referral of powers is effected by a state passing the necessary legislation; for example, the Corporations (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2001 (NSW). This referral legislation is substantially the same in each referring state. The basis of the agreement between the Commonwealth and the states was that the Commonwealth would initially restrict itself to enacting an agreed package of legislation based on the pre-existing Corporations Law and the Australian Securities Commission Act 1989. Thereafter, the Commonwealth would have power to amend that legislation, subject to agreed limitations. This cautiously structured agreement requires each referring state to make two referrals of power, identified in ss 4(4)-(5) of the Corporations Act. The first is the ‘initial reference’ This is a referral by a state of sufficient power to enable the Commonwealth to enact the initial Corporations Act and the ASIC Act (see s 4(4)). The second is the ‘amendment reference’ This is a referral by a state of power to make express amendments to the initial legislation in relation to the formation of corporations, corporate regulation, and the regulation of financial products and services (see s 4(5)). A state that makes both of these referrals is described in the Corporations Act as a ‘referring State’ (s 4(1)). Note that the amendment reference limits the Commonwealth to making ‘express amendments: This is defined to mean the direct amendment of the Corporations Act or the ASIC Act but does not include the enactment of a provision that has a substantive effect otherwise than as part of those Acts (s 4(9)). The purpose of this limitation is to prevent the Commonwealth from using the amendment power as an indirect method of legislating on other matters that fall outside the agreed scope of the referral. In particular, the state referral Acts expressly provide that they are not intended to enable the Commonwealth to the ‘initial reference’ This is a referral by a state of sufficient power to enable the Commonwealth to enact the initial Corporations Act and the ASIC Act (see s 4(4)). The second is the ‘amendment reference’ This is a referral by a state of power to make

The first exercise of power under the amendment reference was the enactment of the Financial Services Reform Act 2001 (Cth) which repealed and replaced chs 7 and 8 of the Corporations Act. Under the agreement between the Commonwealth and the states, the initial reference and the amendment reference terminates five years after the commencement date of the Corporations Act unless the referring state agrees to fix a later date. Each referring state has since agreed to extend the referral of power for further periods. At the time this chapter was written, the latest agreement of an extension of the referral of power occurred in June 2021, with an expiry in July 2031122 The scheme also contemplates the termination of one or both of a state's referrals before the end of a given five-year period. If a state’s initial reference terminates, then that state ceases to be a referring state (s 4(6)). This means that the state no longer falls within the jurisdiction of the Corporations Act. The current legislative scheme establishes a system of corporate legislation that is regulated and adjudicated on a national basis. However, the survival of the scheme depends upon continued political co-operation between the Commonwealth and the states. It is desirable that the scheme be given a more certain legal foundation. This could be achieved through a constitutional amendment pursuant to a referendum to give full responsibility for registering and regulating corporations.
## 1.50.15 The jurisdiction of the legislation

The Corporations Act uses the expression ‘this jurisdiction’ to define the geographical range of its coverage. That expression is defined in s 9 to mean each referring state plus the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory. If each state makes and continues the relevant referrals, then ‘this jurisdiction’ consists of the whole of Australia (s 5(2)). The Act does not apply to a non-referring State unless that application is otherwise based upon some legislative power of the Commonwealth. The ASIC Act is also expressed to apply in ‘this jurisdiction’ (ASIC Act s 4). A company that is registered under the Corporations Act!2" is incorporated in the jurisdiction covered by the Act (s 119A(1)). The company is also taken to be registered in the state or territory that is specified in the company’s application for registration (s 119A(2)). The latter provision is necessary because of state laws (for example, stamp duties legislation) that impose obligations or rights on a company by reference to the state or territory of registration. If the state in which a company is registered ceases to be a referring State then the company continues to be registered under the Act, and the company can nominate another state or territory as the one in which it is taken to be registered (ss 119A(3)-(4)). Acompany that was already in existence when the Corporations Act commenced is taken to be registered under the Act with the same attributes (s 1378). The company is taken to be registered in the state or territory in which it was registered immediately before the commencement of the Act. Many of the detailed regulatory requirements in the contemporary system of Australian corporate law are not found in the Corporations Act but in rules and regulations made under the authority of the Act. This includes the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Cth) that are made under pt 9.12 of the Act (ss 1363- 1369A). The main purpose of the Corporations Regulations is to give effect to the primary provisions in the Act, such as defining key terms, specifying procedures and forms, and prescribing various amounts, fines and penalties. However, the Corporations Regulations are not solely concerned with matters of ‘machinery’ Increasingly, they have been used for more significant purposes, such as modifying the operation of sections in the Act or specifying exemptions from the operation of the Act. Such is the reliance on delegated legislation that, in some parts of the Act, the number of sections is greatly exceeded by the number of regulations.122 In addition to the Corporations Regulations, ASIC has power under the Act to issue legislative instruments (previously known as ‘class orders’) that omit, modify or vary the application of provisions in the Act generally, or in relation to a class of persons. Such instruments might be made in response to perceived gaps in the Act, or to unintended consequences of the operation of the legislation, or in anticipation of foreshadowed amendments to the Act or Regulations. Consequently, a particular provision in the Corporations Act can be comprised of the formal text in the legislation plus a set of modifications and amendments is found in the applicable legislative instruments.123 Other sources of constraint that can affect corporate operations are found in:

+ the operating rules made by licensed financial market operators (such as the Australian Securities Exchange) that govern the admission of companies and
other entities to the official list of the exchange and the trading of securities on that market!24

* accounting and auditing standards made by the Australian Accounting Standards Board and the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board.!25

Aconcern of corporate law reformers since the 1960s has been the desire for a uniform set of corporate rules that is applied and regulated nationally. Furthermore, disputes about the application of the legislation should be adjudicated within a single system. We now outline the role of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (and related regulatory bodies), and the jurisdiction of courts under the Corporations Act.

## 1.60.05 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission

The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) is the sole authority responsible for administering the Corporations Act28The Commission is a body corporate established under s 8 of the ASIC Act 2001 (Cth). Some of the diverse regulatory philosophy which informs the work of ASIC can be found in s 1(2) of the ASIC Act which states that in performing its functions and exercising its powers ASIC must strive to: (a) maintain, facilitate and improve the performance of the financial system and the entities within that system in the interests of commercial certainty, reducing business costs, and the efficiency and development of the economy; and (b) promote the confident and informed participation of investors and consumers in the financial system; and (c) [repealed] (d) administer the laws that confer functions and powers on it effectively and with a minimum of procedural requirements; and (e) receive, process and store, efficiently and quickly, the information given to ASIC under the laws that confer functions and powers on it; and (f) ensure that information is available as soon as practicable for access by the public; and (g) take whatever action it can take, and is necessary, in order to enforce and give effect to the laws of the Commonwealth that confer functions and powers onit. A careful reading of this list reveals a possible tension between the goals of investor protection, publicity and enforcement on the one hand, and facilitating company performance and promoting efficiency and commercial certainty on the other. This is an example of the debate between facilitation and intervention, discussed earlier at Section 1.10. In relation to the Corporations Act, ASIC's functions include:

+ the regulation and surveillance of public fundraising and the securities markets (including consideration of licence applications for market licensees)
+ investigations under, and enforcement of, the Act (including exercising discretion to grant exemptions or other relief from the legislation)
+ the collection and processing of information on companies (including registration of companies, lodgement of disclosure and takeover documents)
+ advising the Minister (in practice, the Commonwealth Treasurer) on the practical operation of the Act and on proposals for law reform (ASIC Act s 11).

ASIC publishes a variety of regulatory material which has the purpose of publicly indicating ASIC's policies and practices in the exercise of its regulatory discretion. There has been public discussion about whether ASIC's functions under the Act are too broad for a single body to perform effectively. In July 2024, a report by the Senate Standing Committee on Economics recommended that the Commission’s functions should be divided between a companies regulator and a financial conduct authority122 ASIC is formally accountable and responsible to the relevant Commonwealth Minister, and to the Commonwealth Parliament. The Minister has the power to give ASIC directions about the policies it should pursue or the priorities it should follow in relation to the corporations legislation, and ASIC is required to comply with any such direction (s 12). The Minister may also direct ASIC to investigate alleged or suspected contraventions of the Corporations Act. ASIC's overall effectiveness and capability is reviewed and assessed on a biennial basis by the Financial Regulator Assessment Authority (FRAA), an independent statutory body established in response to recommendations made by the Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry in 2019.28 The FRAA reports on the results of its assessments to the relevant Commonwealth Minister. The Minister may also request the FRAA to consider (or not consider) particular matters when conducting an assessment22 and Assurance Standards Board (AUASB). The FRC is directly responsible to the Minister, who appoints members of the Council. The FRC was established to provide broad oversight of the process for setting accounting and auditing standards (s 225). The FRC appoints the members of the AASB and AUASB (other than the chairs) and oversees the operations of those Boards. The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services

Part 14 of the ASIC Act establishes the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services. The duties of this Committee are to inquire into activities of the Commission and the Takeovers Panel, as well as the operation of the corporations legislation. The Committee has 10 members with equal representation from the Senate and the House of Representatives. The Committee is required to examine the annual reports produced by each of the bodies mentioned above. Further, either House of Parliament may refer questions to the Committee for inquiry and report. While the Committee does, from time to time, receive references to inquire into broader questions of corporate law reform,2! much of its work is concerned with inquiries into Bills that are referred by Parliament. Abolition of Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee

A close reading of the ASIC Act shows a gap between pt 8 and pt 10: pt 9 was repealed in 2018. This was due to the unfortunate decision of the federal coalition government in 2014 to defund the Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee (CAMAC), which had been created by pt 9. CAMAC’s statutory function was to advise and make recommendations to the Minister on reforms to the corporations legislation and its administration, and on matters connected with companies or a segment of the financial products and financial services industry. Members of the Committee were appointed by the Minister on a parttime basis, based on their knowledge of, or experience in, business, company administration, the financial markets, law, economics or accounting. Throughout this book, reference will be made to the many reports produced by this Committee since its inception in 1989 when it was established under its previous name: the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee (CASAC).42 The Commonwealth Treasury has now taken over the functions previously performed by CAMAC. The abolition of CAMAC was unanticipated and widely opposed by legal and industry experts. The apparent rationale for this action was to achieve budgetary savings, even though at the time of its abolition CAMAC’s operating budget was ‘modest’ In our view, there is a strong argument for the re-establishment of CAMAC, or a similar body, to provide independent and consultation-supported advice to government, drawing on a broad base of expertise, on matters of corporate law and governance, the regulation of financial markets, and insolvency. Such advice would be provided either in response to government request or at the initiative of the body. In addition to those bodies set up by the ASIC Act, ASIC has established co-operative relationships with a number of international and Australian regulatory agencies. Memoranda of Understanding have been entered into with agencies such as the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority, the United States Securities Exchange Commission, the United Kingdom's Financial Services Authority, the Securities Commission of New Zealand, and the Australian Taxation Office. Responding to the global nature of modern corporate structures and finance, ASIC is also involved in the work of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). The prosecution of offences under the corporations legislation is the joint responsibility of ASIC and the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). The relationship between these two bodies is governed by a Memorandum of Understanding signed in 2006. Under that agreement, if ASIC has gathered sufficient evidence to form a belief that an offence may have been committed, including indictable matters and offences involving fraud or dishonesty, it refers the matter to the DPP, which then decides whether charges should be laid. However, ASIC can prosecute minor regulatory offences where there is a guilty plea without referring the matter to the DPP134 Part 9.6A of the Corporations Act specifies the scheme for the cross-vesting of civil and criminal jurisdictions regarding corporate law matters between state courts and the Federal and Family Courts. This is based on the cross-vesting scheme that operated before the High Court's decision in Re Wakim. The original rationale for the cross-vesting scheme is still relevant. As described by Kirby J, it provides a ‘beneficial facility ... for the efficient use of hard-pressed resources and the reduction of inconvenience, delay and cost to litigants’13> In summary, jurisdiction in civil matters arising under the Corporations Act and the ASIC Act is conferred on the Federal Court of Australia, the Family Court, the Supreme Court of each state and territory, each state Family Court, and (subject to the general jurisdictional limits relating to amounts or value of property) on the lower courts of each state and territory (Corporations Act ss 1337B, 1337C, 1337E). For these purposes, a ‘civil matter’ is defined broadly as any matter other than a criminal matter (s 9). Civil matters range from a simple action for recovery of a debt from a corporation to a complex application for a court order for the winding up of a company. The jurisdiction of the state and territory Supreme Courts also includes matters arising under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 (Cth) (hereafter ‘ADUR) Act matters’) involving or related to decisions made under the corporations legislation by Commonwealth authorities or officers (s 1337B(3)). Section 1337G provides that all courts having jurisdiction in civil matters and ADUR) Act matters under the corporations legislation must ‘severally act in aid of, and be auxiliary to, each other in all those matters. The Corporations Act provides for the transfer of a civil matter (or an ADUR) Act matter) commenced in one court to another as follows: Federal Court and Supreme Courts: if it appears to a court that, having regard to the interests of justice, it is more appropriate for a proceeding to be determined by another court that has jurisdiction in the matter, then the matter may be transferred to that other court (s 1337H). Limitations apply where the proceedings involve an ADUJR) Act matter. Federal and state Family Courts: if a proceeding arises out of, or is related to another proceeding pending in the Federal Court or another state or territory court, then the matter may be transferred if that other court is the most appropriate to determine the proceeding (s 1317J(2)). Lower courts: if it is in the interests of justice to do so, a lower court can transfer a matter to another lower court, or to the Supreme Court in the same state as the local court. The transfer may recommend that the proceeding then be transferred to another court. The Supreme Court may decide to deal with the matter itself or to transfer the matter to some other court (this includes transferring the matter back to the lower court (s 1337K). In addition, s 1317B of the Corporations Act gives the Administrative Review Tribunal the jurisdiction to review decisions made by the Minister, ASIC, or the Companies Auditors Disciplinary Board (subject to exclusions listed in s 1317C). A proceeding or application in a civil matter may be transferred on the application of a party or on the court’s own motion (s 1337M). When a court is deciding whether to transfer a proceeding, it must have regard to the principal place of business of any body corporate concerned in the matter, to the place where the events in question took place, and to the other courts that have jurisdiction to deal with the matter (s 1337L). Jurisdiction in criminal matters can be summarised as follows: the courts of each state and territory that exercise jurisdiction in summary or indictable matters involving offences against state or territory laws have the equivalent jurisdiction with respect to offences under the Corporations Act or the ASIC Act (s 1338B).

## 1.65.05 The civil penalty regime

The Corporations Act contains an enforcement framework that sits between civil and criminal proceedings. It is known as the civil penalty regime and is found in pt 9.4B of the Act. This Part, which was introduced in 1993, applies to a number of sections throughout the Corporations Act that have been designated as civil penalty provisions (listed in s 1317E), including the directors’ duty sections in ss 180-1835 The civil penalty regime allows ASIC to take enforcement action in response to contraventions of these designated sections. It brings the possibility of public regulation to bear on areas, such as directors’ duties, ‘that are commonly associated with private law’!32 The civil penalty regime was introduced as a consequence of recommendations made in the 1989 Report of the Senate Standing Committee of Legal and Constitutional Affairs. Those recommendations were prompted by a submission made to the Committee by Professor Brent Fisse.12 Fisse’s ideas were set out in his work with Professor John Braithwaite in their book Corporations, Crime and Accountability2 The authors argue that to achieve effective compliance with rules, a‘pyramidal enforcement’ model is needed. Enforcement of legal rules by agencies such as ASIC should begin at the base of the pyramid with a broad range of informal methods. Only when compliance at this level is not effective does the enforcement escalate progressively up the pyramid. There are Criminal sanctions (eg fines, prison) Non-criminal sanctions (eg civil penalties, disqualification, licence suspension) Compensation order

Infringement notice (eg for contravention of continuous disclosure requirements) Negotiated resolution (including enforceable undertaking) Regulatory guidance | Figure 1.1 a Figure 1.1 Example of corporate enforcement pyramid Figure 1.1 long description.

In theory, this enforcement strategy begins at the base of the pyramid with advice and warnings before moving up to administrative actions such as infringement notices and enforceable undertakings,“ followed by civil penalties and criminal sanctions as the last resort. The shape of the pyramid indicates that the enforcement strategies at the apex will be less frequent; those at the base will be more commonly used. The introduction of these ideas into the Corporations Act was prompted by two underlying beliefs. First, a system of corporate law enforced predominantly by criminal penalties had two adverse consequences: directors and other corporate actors could be discouraged from legitimate risk-taking by the threat of criminal sanctions; and the stigma of criminal liability could attach to minor or procedural misbehaviour (for example, a failure to comply with the detail of annual directors’ reporting requirements in s 299) rather than being limited to serious criminal behaviour. Second, the enforcement pyramid works on the basis that ‘actors, individual or corporate, are most likely to comply if they know that enforcement is backed by sanctions which can be escalated in response to any given level of non-compliance’!42 The practical implementation of this regulatory model has drawn some criticism. ASIC’s enforcement practices were scrutinised by the Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry. In its Final Report, the Commission observed that: ‘The regulatory pyramid ... reflects two very practical observations: not all contraventions of law are of equal significance; and regulators do not have unlimited time or resources. But it is whollv consistent with the analvses that are expressed bv the metavhor of ‘The regulatory pyramid ... reflects two very practical observations: not all contraventions of law are of equal significance; and regulators do not have unlimited time or resources. But it is wholly consistent with the analyses that are expressed by the metaphor of the regulatory pyramid, that serious breaches of law by large entities call for the highest level of regulatory response. And that is what has been missing. Too often serious breaches of law by large entities have yielded nothing more than a few infringement notices, an enforceable undertaking ... not to offend again (with or without an immaterial ‘public benefit payment’) or some agreed form of media release 43 Having looked at the policy context, we now turn to the details of the civil penalty regime which, in Figure 1.1, sits in the upper part of the enforcement pyramid. Note that in the context of contraventions of the directors’ duties provisions, additional sections can also come into operation.“ If there is a contravention of a civil penalty provision, there are two possible consequences. The first consequence is that ASIC may apply to the court for a declaration of contravention (s 1317J(1)). The court must make the declaration if it is satisfied there has been a contravention of the relevant section (s 1317). Once a declaration of contravention has been made ASIC can then apply for a range of orders. These are discussed in detail in Chapter 10 of this book in the context of directors’ duties and the reader is directed to that discussion (see Section 10.35.10). In summary, the possible orders are: (1) A pecuniary penalty order (s 1317G). This is an order to pay a financial penalty, which becomes a debt payable to ASIC (s 1317GAA). The penalty amounts are significant and are part of a broader strategy ‘to combat misconduct and improve community confidence in the corporate and financial sector’ For an individual the amount is the greater of 5000 penalty units;“ or if the court can determine the benefit derived and detriment avoided because of the contravention, three times that amount (s 1317G(3)). For a body corporate, the amount is the greater of 50,000 penalty units, or three times the benefit derived and detriment avoided (if that can be determined), or 10 per cent of the annual turnover of the body corporate in the 12 months preceding the contravention, capped at the equivalent of 2.5 million penalty units. (2) A relinquishment order (s 1317GAB). This is an order to pay to the Commonwealth an amount equal to the benefit derived and detriment avoided because of a contravention of a civil penalty provision. The court can make a relinquishment order even if a pecuniary penalty order has been made (s 1317GAB(3)). (3) A disqualification order (s 206C). This is an order disqualifying a person from managing corporations for a period that is determined by the court to be appropriate. The second possible consequence is a compensation order (ss 1317H, HA). This may be sought by ASIC or by the company (ss 1317J(1), (2)). The person who has contravened the Act may be ordered to compensate the company for damage it has suffered if the damage has resulted from the contravention. Note that a compensation order does not require that there has been a declaration of contravention. Notwithstanding the idea of graduated enforcement that underlies the pyramid model, criminal proceedings can apply. This will occur where a section expressly provides for a criminal offence (see, for example, s 184 regarding directors’ duties and s 1043A regarding insider trading)42. As explained in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Whitebox Trading Pty Ltd, even though a civil penalty provision does not itself create a criminal offence, a person who contravenes such a provision may be guilty of an offence by virtue of s 1311(1)-48 That section makes it an offence for a person to do something that is forbidden by a provision in the Act, or to fail to do something the person is required to do.? If the person is convicted of the offence they cannot then be subject to a declaration of contravention or a pecuniary penalty order for the same conduct (s 1317M). Further, assuming that there is an applicable offence provision, criminal proceedings may commence for conduct that is substantially the same as conduct constituting the contravention of a civil penalty provision even if a declaration of contravention or a pecuniary penalty order or a compensation order or a disqualification order has been made (s 1317P). The remainder of this book will be primarily concerned with the substantive provisions of the Corporations Act, together with relevant case law. This chapter has demonstrated that the current Act is an amalgamation of over a century of ideas about the nature of corporate activity and how it should be regulated. It is necessary, then, to consider the formalities and some practicalities of how the Act is interpreted.

## 1.70.05 The interpretation provisions

Section 7 of the Corporations Act notes that the ‘dictionary’ in s 9 of the Act defines most of the terms used in the Act, but also notes that interpretation provisions that relevant to a single section maybe found in that section. The Acts Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth) applies to the Corporations Act and the ASIC Act. Of particular importance are ss 1SAA-AD of the Acts Interpretation Act. The intention of these sections is to encourage a purposive and policy- oriented approach to statutory interpretation. In the context of the corporations legislation, these sections emphasise the need to determine the underlying purpose or object of the provisions in the Corporations Act. Section 15AA of the Acts Interpretation Act states that: In interpreting a provision of an Act, the interpretation that would achieve the purpose or object of the Act (whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act) is to be preferred to each other interpretation. By virtue of s 15AB, in determining the meaning of a provision in the Corporations Act, material outside the text of the legislation may be relied on to confirm the ordinary meaning of a provision, taking its context and policy into account, or to clarify ambiguities, obscurities or absurdities in drafting. Section 15AB(2) contains a detailed, but non-exhaustive, list of such material. The list includes explanatory memoranda!” relating to the Bill that introduced the particular provision, and parliamentary second reading speeches. The list in s 15AB(2) also refers to reports of Royal Commissions, Parliamentary Committees and other committees of inquiry. Any such report must have been put before either House of Parliament before the time at which the particular provision was enacted.

## 1.70.10 Interpretation: issues and debates

The interpretation of complex and ever-changing legislation that has a direct impact on business and society, such as the Corporations Act, raises a number of issues. Here we note three of them: the relevance of ASIC statements about the interpretation of the Act, the complexity of the legislation, and the impact of the general law on the interpretation of the legislation. ASIC's interpretation of the Act

The non-exhaustive list of extra-statutory material in s 15AB(2) of the Acts Interpretation Act does not make express reference to the regulatory guides published by ASIC. Regulatory guides are formal statements by the Commission about how it will exercise specific powers under the Corporations Act and how it interprets the law it administers. Those who are affected by the legislation should expect that ASIC will publicise its policies about how it intends to apply those rules so that they can appropriately plan their actions251 Should these statements be taken into account by the courts in interpreting the statute? An answer to this question was indicated in Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd v Grace Brothers Holdings Ltd, where Sheppard J stated that while regulatory guides ‘are proper to be considered, they cannot bind a judge in the task of interpreting an Act:'[nJothing done by an officer of the executive government can control the construction of an Act of Parliament unless the Parliament itself has said so:!52 The opinions and interpretations of an administrative agency can provide guidance to a court but, as High Court Chief Justice Gageler has written, s 15AB does ‘not result in extrinsic material being substituted for the words of the statute’!52 Complexity of the legislation

Partly because of its history, the Corporations Act contains a mixture of drafting styles. Some provisions are worded in an open-textured manner that lay down broad principles, allowing courts and regulators the opportunity to exercise interpretative discretion. Other provisions are lengthy, detailed and technical, attempting to deal with a particular issue in precise terms and to minimise the scope for regulatory or judicial discretion. In some instances, this might be because Parliament has attempted to ‘cover the field’ of a particular problem. Another reason is that the legislation simply reflects the complexity of modern corporate and commercial transactions.154

## 1.70.05 The interpretation provisions

## 1.70.10 Interpretation: issues and debates ASIC's interpretation of the Act

The non-exhaustive list of extra-statutory material in s 15AB(2) of the Acts Interpretation Act does not make express reference to the regulatory guides published by ASIC. Regulatory guides are formal statements by the Commission about how it will exercise specific powers under the Corporations Act and how it interprets the law it administers. Those who are affected by the legislation should expect that ASIC will publicise its policies about how it intends to apply those rules so that they can appropriately plan their actions.151 Should these statements be taken into account by the courts in interpreting the statute? An answer to this question was indicated in Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd v Grace Brothers Holdings Ltd, where Sheppard J stated that while regulatory guides ‘are proper to be considered, they cannot bind a judge in the task of interpreting an Act:'[nJothing done by an officer of the executive government can control the construction of an Act of Parliament unless the Parliament itself has said so:!52 The opinions and interpretations of an administrative agency can provide guidance to a court but, as High Court Chief Justice Gageler has written, s 15AB does ‘not result in extrinsic material being substituted for the words of the statute’152 Complexity of the legislation

Gageler has written, s 15AB does ‘not result in extrinsic material being substituted for the words of the statute’152 Complexity of the legislation Inevitably, this complexity has attracted criticism. Sir Anthony Mason has remarked that too much legislative detail ‘can obscure the identification of policy goals and guidelines, reducing the role of the courts to an application of the statutory language which, on its own, does not always make much economic, social or practical sense’155 One response to this complexity was the Corporations Law Simplification Task Force, established in 1993 by the Commonwealth Attorney-General, an aim of which was to make the Corporations Act more ‘accessible’ to people affected by its provisions but who lack professional skills in the use of legislation. One manifestation of this ‘user-friendly’ approach was the insertion of a Small Business Guide into the body of the legislation. Found in pt 1.5, the guide summarises the main rules in the Act that apply to proprietary companies limited by share capital. The Task Force was discontinued in March 1997. More recently, the Australian Law Reform Commission recommended sweeping changes to the design and structure of ch 7 of the Act, dealing with financial services and markets, to address the ‘legislative maze’!5* If accepted, those recommendations will have implications for the design of the remainder of the Act. This debate about the form of legislation is long-standing in modern liberal legal systems. The tension arises because liberal political philosophy requires, on the one hand, that laws should be specific and predictable so that individuals can plan their transactions within the framework of the law. This demands precision and detail in legislative drafting. On the other hand, laws should also be capable of general application, in a manner that is consistent with the purpose underlying the rule. This demands that rules be drafted so that they apply equally to all relevant classes of person affected, while allowing for individual exceptions. The Corporations Act continues to contain examples of both types of drafting. The impact of general law

This chapter has focused on the statutory development of corporate law in Australia, but common law and equity (‘general law’) also continue to play a major role in corporate law and the application of the Corporations Act. The relationship between the general law and the Act varies from one corporate law topic to another. Being aware of this variability is an important step in learning about modern Australian corporate law. The general law and the Corporations Act can interact in one of three ways:

1. The Act expressly replaces the pre-existing general law: an example is found in pt 2F.1A, dealing with shareholder derivative actions, where s 236(3) abol-
ishes the right to bring such an action at general law. This is covered in Chapter 14 at Section 14.35.

2. The Act draws on, perhaps with some modification, general law rules: examples are found in ss 128-9, setting out the assumptions that a person who has
dealings with a company is entitled to make. This is dealt with in Chapter 6 on corporate contracting. These assumptions can be understood by reference to an established body of case law. The question confronting the courts in this situation is the extent to which the legislators intended to depart from the general law: to what extent should the general law principles constrain the interpretation of the statute?

3. The Act and the general law operate side by side: the prime example of this is found in pt 2D.1, dealing with the duties of company directors and officers.
These sections, which are enforceable by ASIC, operate alongside general law doctrines on directors’ duties, which (depending on the circumstances) provide a cause of action for a company or its shareholders. The law on directors’ duties (statutory and general law) is dealt with in Chapters 10-13. The question here is: to what extent should the general law principles influence the interpretation of the sections? Complexity of the legislation The impact of general law

Amendments to the Corporations Act and the ASIC Act, as Commonwealth legislation, must pass through the usual processes in both Houses of the federal Parliament. However, the Commonwealth does not have a free hand in deciding amendments. First, the Commonwealth's power to amend is limited by the amendment reference from the states, which is defined in terms of express amendments. Second, the current scheme of corporations legislation is based upon an intergovernmental agreement between the states, territories and Commonwealth. A key part of that agreement deals with the processes by which the legislation may be amended. The agreement contains a mechanism for state involvement in the law reform process, via the Legislative and Governance Forum for Corporations (previously called the Ministerial Council for Corporations). The Forum consists of one Minister from each state, the Northern Territory, and the Commonwealth, and is chaired by the Commonwealth Minister. The agreement requires the Commonwealth to use its best endeavours to ensure there is consultation and voting on legislative amendments. Further, the Commonwealth is required to refrain from moving amendments that lie outside the scope of the reference from the states. The states are required to obtain a vote from the Forum regarding any amendment to a state/territory law that would significantly override the Corporations Act. The Commonwealth must obtain the approval of at least three states before making an amendment to the legislation in areas where approval of the Forum is required. The prime responsibility for legislative policy in relation to the legislation lies with the Commonwealth Department of the Treasury. Before 1996, the Department of Attorney-General had responsibility for corporate law and policy. The shift to Treasury suggests that corporate law reform is regarded as an aspect of economic policy and corporate regulation is seen as business regulation. A wider view would recognise that corporate activity has long ceased to be exclusively associated with private business activity, and that the corporate form of organisation now permeates all aspects of Australian society including government, welfare and social services, and family financial planning. It is appropriate at the end of this chapter to consider some wider aspects of corporate regulation. Australian corporate law is the product of many influences, including its British antecedents, the history of Australian federalism, and shifting economic and political philosophies about the acceptability of governmental involvement in corporate and business affairs. This reminds us that our contemporary system of corporate law and regulation does not operate in a vacuum. It is shaped and affected by wider legal, political and economic contexts. It increasingly operates in a global context. This has led some legal scholars to reflect on whether there are discernible patterns and developments in global corporate law and regulation. One influential argument in recent years is that, despite some minor differences in patterns of share ownership, capital market structures and business culture, corporate law systems around the world are converging on the Anglo-US (and Australian) model of corporate law and governance that gives priority to the interests of shareholders over other stakeholders.1®2 In this view, corporate law has evolved to the point where the shareholder-centered model dominates other contenders, including the stakeholder model that tends to be favoured by proponents of corporate social responsibility and ethical capitalism. This ‘convergence thesis’ has been criticised because, while at a distance there are similarities in the corporate law systems of countries such as Australia, the United

Kingdom and the United States, on closer inspection the differences are significant. American corporate law scholar Christopher Bruner summarises the position: [GJeneralizations regarding the so-called Anglo-American, Anglo-Saxon, or common-law corporate governance model obscure more than they illuminate. Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States do exhibit substantial similarities in their business cultures, financial structures, and legal traditions, yet they nevertheless diverge markedly in terms of the degree of governance power granted to shareholders and the degree to which corporate (or company) law in a given country prioritizes the shareholders’ interests 58 The main problem with the convergence argument is that it disregards the important role played by local legal, regulatory, political, economic and social conditions in shaping corporate practices and the way they are regulated. Another difficulty is the notion that corporate law ‘evolves’ in a regular or linear series of steps, each improving on what has come before. The historical summary presented in this chapter shows, to the contrary, that Australian corporations legislation has developed in an uneven way, as governments and pressure groups have responded to problems, usually in periods of significant economic crisis52 We will discuss the convergence thesis again in the next chapter at Section 2.50. These debates about the shape and purpose of corporate regulation serve as a prelude to the next chapter of this book in which we consider broader theoretical perspectives on the corporation as a social, economic and political actor. This chapter began by identifying four perennial questions or tensions that permeate the history, and current development, of corporate law: how to balance the rights and obligations of the group with those of the individuals who comprise that group; how to ensure the accountability of those who manage a corporation to those who are notionally its owners; whether the role of the law is simply to facilitate the creation and efficient operation of corporations, or whether it should have a regulatory or interventionist role; and whether corporations are essentially private structures or also have public responsibilities. These questions overlap; the answer to one will be shaped by the answer to another. By explaining the history and current structure of our corporate law, this chapter has shown that there is no single ‘right’ or ‘permanent’ answer to any of these questions. Over time, the answers have oscillated in response to shifting economic, political, social and, more recently, environmental factors. This chapter has charted the historical origins of contemporary Australian corporate legislation, commencing with the situation in England in the seventeenth century. In considering early English history, we saw that the core features of the modern corporation and corporate law—the joint stock idea, limited liability of members, incorporation by registration, public disclosure of company financial information—were developed at different times, rather than ina single legislative package, and arose in response to the demands of the economy and commercial practice at different historical junctures. This chapter demonstrated how development of corporate law, although based on the English framework, responded to local economic imperatives (the creation of the’no liability’ mining company being a prime example). Australian corporate law has also had to contend with the politics of a federal system of government. This chapter illustrated that there have been several attempts to achieve a uniform system of corporations legislation that is administered and adjudicated on a uniform basis. This chapter explained the structure of the current ‘referral of powers’ scheme, including the role of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission and the jurisdiction of the courts in dealing with corporate law matters. Issues in the interpretation of the Corporations Act were also examined. Finally, this chapter briefly considered recent arguments about the development of corporate law on a global scale, emphasising the continued importance of local legal, regulatory, political, economic and social conditions. Asa final point, despite many years of legislative reform to different parts of the Corporations Act, Australian corporate law reformers have not recently undertaken a thorough review of the models and assumptions that might guide future regulation in the corporations and securities area, as has been done in countries such as New Zealand and the United Kingdom. The processes of Australian corporate law reform have tended to be more piecemeal. Any such review would require consideration of the underlying philosophy of a contemporary corporate law system, and in the next chapter we outline the main theoretical perspectives to be considered. 1 EH Carr, What is History? (Penguin, 2nd ed, 1987) 23.

2 In addition, note Richard Dale, The First Crash: Lessons from the South Sea Bubble (Princeton University Press, 2005); R Harris, Industrialising English Law: Entrepreneurship and Business Organisation 1720-1844 (Cambridge University Press, 2000); P Johnson, Making the Market: Victorian Origins of Corporate Capitalism (Cambridge University Press, 2010). 3 See, eg, R Kostal, Law and English Railway Capitalism (Clarendon Press, 1994). 4We qualify the word ownership’ because, as we will see, it is not strictly accurate to say that the corporation is owned’ by its members. 5 See, eg, Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry (Final Report, 4 February 2019). § See, eg, A Godwin, PW Lee, and R Teele Langford (eds), Technology and Corporate Law: How Innovation Shapes Corporate Activity (Edward Elgar, 2021). This has been described variously as ‘platform capitalism’: N Smnicek, Platform Capitalism (Polity Press, 2017);'informational capitalism’: JE Cohen, Between Truth and Power: The Legal Constructions of Informational Capitalism (Oxford University Press, 2019); and ‘chokepoint capitalism: R Giblin and C Doctorow, Chokepoint Capitalism (Beacon Press, 2022). Z See J Braithwaite and P Drahos, Global Business Regulation (Cambridge University Press, 2000) ch 9; SJ Stoljar, Groups and Entities—An Inquiry into Corporate Theory (ANU Press, 1973). 8 See, eg, W Dalrymple, The Anarchy: The Relentless Rise of the East India Company (Bloomsbury, 2019); P Stern, Empire Incorporated: The Corporations that Built British Colonialism (Belknap Press, 2023). 2 Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Clarendon Press, 1976) 741. 1 WR Cornish and G de N Clark, Law and Society in England 1750-1950 (Sweet & Maxwell, 1989) 248. For discussion of the direct and indirect costs of incorporation, see GM Anderson and RD Tollison, ‘The Myth of the Corporation as a Creation of the State’ (1983) 3(2) International Review of Law and Economics 107, 112. 11.CA Cooke, Corporation, Trust and Company: An Essay in Legal History (Manchester University Press, 1950) 46, Holdsworth lists other reasons, including legislative hostility to the notion of limited liability: W Holdsworth, A History of English Law (Methuen, 2nd ed, 1937) 96-7. 12 The following discussion relies on P Ireland, ‘The Rise of the Limited Liability Company’ (1984) 12(3) International Journal of Sociology of Law 239. 13 The concept of corporate separate legal status is discussed in detail in Chapter 3. 14W Holdsworth, A History of English Law (Methuen, 2nd ed, 1937) 215. 15 Cooke cites examples of joint stock companies which were set up ‘To make salt water fresh’ and’For an undertaking which shall in due time be revealed’: CA Cooke, Corporation, Trust and Company: An Essay in Legal History (Manchester University Press, 1950) 81. 18 R Formoy, The Historical Foundations of Modern Company Law (Sweet & Maxwell, 1923) 28. 12 An annuity is a form of investment which gives an investor the right to receive a fixed sum of money on an annual basis for a defined period of years. 18 See Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Clarendon Press, 1976) ch 1. 12 bid 741. 20 Js Mill, Principles of Political Economy (Longmans, 1923) ch IX.

21 Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy (vol Ill) https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Capital-Volume-lIIl_ pdf
22 Ibid 304. 23 Bubble Act 1720, 6 Geo |, c 18, ss 18-21.

24The deeds of settlement were the forerunners of the modern company constitution. 25 FW Maitland, Collected Papers (III) (Cambridge University Press, 1911) 283. 26 This concept has remained in the form of the modern proprietary company.

22. CA Cooke, Corporation, Trust and Company: An Essay in Legal History (Manchester University Press, 1950) 96.

28 LCB Gower, Gower's Principles of Modern Company Law (Sweet & Maxwell, 5th ed, 1992) 31. 22 See, eg, R Kostal, Law and English Railway Capitalism (Clarendon Press, 1994). 32.CA Cooke, Corporation, Trust and Company: An Essay in Legal History (Manchester University Press, 1950) 49. 31 Kostal, Law and English Railway Capitalism (Clarendon Press, 1994) 23.

32 CA Cooke, Corporation, Trust and Company: An Essay in Legal History (Manchester University Press, 1950) 97-9. 33 WR Cornish and G de N Clark, Law and Society in England 1750-1950 (Sweet & Maxwell, 1989) 252-3.
