# Chapter 16

Winding up and liquidation 16.05 Introduction 16.10 Poli 16.15 Winding up

## 16.15.05 What is winding up?

## 16.15.10 Compulsory winding up in insolvency

## 16.15.15 Proving insolvency

## 16.15.20 Statutory demands

## 16.15.25 Court order to wind up the company: introduction

## 16.20.05 Registration and appointment of liquidators

## 16.20.10 Powers of liquidators

## 16.20.15 Duties of the liquidator 16.25 Recovery of assets: voidable transactions

## 16.25.05 Introduction

## 16.25.10 Unfair preferences

## 16.25.15 Uncommercial transactions

## 16.25.20 Insolvent transactions

## 16.25.25 Unfair loans

## 16.25.30 Unreasonable director-related transactions

## 16.25.35 Creditor-defeating disp

## 16.25.40 Invalid circulating security interests

## 16.25.45 Voidable transactions: consequences

## 16.25.50 Transactions not voidable aaainst certain neonle

Winding up and liquidation describe the process by which the business and affairs of a company are brought to an end. Davies et al describe it as follows: Where a company no longer has the funds to function, or its members no longer wish it to function, the first thought is that there needs to be a process for bringing the existence of the legal entity to an end. If the death of the company is the desired objective, this is achieved by winding up the company, or liquidating it (the two terms can be used interchangeably). The process of winding up, or liquidation, is designed to ensure that, before the company ceases to exist, all its outstanding obligations are met (so far as they can be) and any surplus assets (if there are any) are distributed to the members according to their agreed entitlement. For reasons which might be obvious, especially given the competing interests which may need to be balanced, this process is not undertaken by the company’s own directors but by independent appointees who are qualified insolvency practitioners and who act professionally as company liquidators. ... When this process is completed, the company is removed from the register: it is ‘dissolved’+ During the winding up process, the business of the company is brought to an end, its assets are collected and sold, and the proceeds applied in accordance with the priorities set out in the Corporations Act. First, the proceeds are applied to creditors and any balance is paid to shareholders. Thereafter, the company is deregistered and ceases to exist. Winding up may be either compulsory (court-ordered) or voluntary. The most common reason for winding up or liquidation is the company’s insolvency. Anote on terminology: as the above quote from Davies et al suggests, the terms ‘winding up’ and ‘liquidation’ are sometimes used interchangeably and at other times they are differentiated. For the purposes of explanation in this chapter we separate these terms. ‘Winding up’ is used to refer to the whole process as just described; this accords with the language of the Corporations Act pts 5.4 to 5.7.‘Liquidation’ refers to the particular task of realising (or selling) the company’s assets so that the proceeds are available to be distributed to creditors (and possibly shareholders). Note, however, that the term ‘liquidator’ is used in the Act, and in practice, to refer to the person appointed to conduct the whole winding up process.

## 16.15.05 What is winding up? Winding up is either:

* compulsory: by a court due to insolvency or other reason under pt 5.4A of the Corporations Act or + voluntary: by the members (if the company is solvent) or by creditors.

Within the broader concept of winding up, liquidation is the process by which the company’s assets are realised and distributed. A liquidator is the person appointed to manage this process. This ultimately results in the dissolution of the company, at which point the company’s existence as a separate legal entity ceases. Liquidation involves a liquidator conducting the affairs of the company to discharge its liabilities in preparation for its dissolution. It may take months, even years, before the company is finally removed from the company register by ASIC. Liquidation has the following objectives:

(1) to gather and realise the available assets (to convert the company’s property into proceeds) (2) to provide for a fair and equitable distribution of the proceeds among its creditors and, if available, to distribute the surplus among the company’s shareholders (3) where the company is insolvent, to allow for the investigation and examination of the company’s transactions and officers’ behaviour. This may result in potential recoveries and actions against officers who have breached the Corporations Act.

## 16.15.10 Compulsory winding up in insolvency
Companies may be compulsorily wound up for insolvency under pt 5.4 of the Corporations Act. Sections 459A and 459B provide that a court can make an order requiring that an insolvent company be wound up. A person can apply to the court for the company to be wound up on the grounds of insolvency, or the court can make an when dealing with an application on some other ground (such as oppression*) and the court is satisfied that the company is insolvent. The definition of insolvency is discussed below at Section 16.15.15 and in Chapter 15 at Section 15.10. An application that the company be wound up in insolvency may be brought by the persons listed in s 459P, including: the company a creditor, including secured, contingent (a person to whom payment is only due on the occurrence of some future event which may or may not occur), or prospective (a person to whom a debt is due but not immediately payable) creditors acontributory, defined in s 9 to include a member (as discussed below) a director a liquidator or provisional liquidator of the company * ASIC.

Acontingent or prospective creditor, a director, contributory, and ASIC must seek the leave of the court prior to making an application and the court may only grant leave if satisfied that there is a prima facie case that the company is insolvent (ss 459P(2)-(3)). A‘contributory’ is defined in s 9 to mean a person who is liable as a member or past member to contribute to the property of the company if it is wound up. Section 9 also states that the holder of fully paid shares is a contributory. Under s 515, every past and present member of a company is liable to contribute to the property of the company on a winding up. The general rule is that a contributory is only required to pay the amount unpaid on shares in respect of which they are liable. Sometimes (for example, with preference shares) there may be a contractual obligation between the company and a contributory which creates a liability to pay the amount of a premium on shares issued to that contributory.®

## 16.15.15 Proving insolvency

(3) a receiver, or receiver and manager, of company property has been appointed pursuant to an instrument relating to a circulating security interest in that property (4) an order has been made for the appointment of a receiver or receiver and manager for the purpose of enforcing a security interest in that property (5) a person has entered into possession or control of that property for the purpose of enforcing such a security interest (6) a person has been appointed to enter into possession or assume control of that property. The most common way that creditors prove a company is insolvent is by showing it has failed to comply with a statutory demand.
## 16.15.20 Statutory demands

The statutory demand procedure provides creditors with an inexpensive method of establishing a company’s insolvency. The provisions of pt 5.4 that regulate statutory demands have been interpreted strictly by the High Court in David Grant & Co Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation? where Gummow J stated that they ‘constitute a legislative scheme for quick resolution of the issue of solvency and the determination of whether the company should be wound up without the interposition of disputes about debts, unless they are raised promptly’1° Pursuant to s 459E, a creditor may serve on a company a written demand (using the prescribed form) for repayment of one or more debts that are due and payable. In the usual course of events, the value of the debt (or the combined value of multiple debts) must be a minimum of $4,000 and the company then has 21 days from the date of service to respond." If the company fails to comply, the creditor can rely on this failure as the basis for a winding up application under s 459P. The statutory demand must comply with s 459E(2) and form 509H?2 is provided for this purpose. Despite many of the forms required by ASIC in relation to companies now being electronic or web-based, this form continues to be required in hard copy and with formal service of the notice to the company. It must be accompanied by an affidavit that verifies that the debt is due and payable by the company." The claim must be for a debt—a liquidated sum. The nature of a ‘liquidated sum’ was explained by Knox CJ and Starke J in Spain v Union Steamship Co of New Zealand Ltd as follows: Whenever the amount to which the plaintiff is entitled ... can be ascertained by calculation or fixed by any scale of charges or positive data it is ... liquidated 15 The claim cannot be an unliquidated claim; that is, one requiring a ‘process of valuation’! or a contingent or prospective claim. An example of an unliquidated claim is an estimate of damages; for example, for breach of contract or negligence. The company can apply to the court to set aside a statutory demand! and the court can make an order setting aside the demand.18 Examples where the court may set aside a demand include when there is a defect in the statutory demand and substantial injustice will be caused unless the demand is set aside (s 459J(1)(a)) or there is a genuine dispute as to the debt claimed (s 459H). ‘Defect’ is defined in s 9. A statutory demand will be held to be defective if it: is so vague or ambiguous that it fails to identify, to a reasonable person in the shoes of a director of the debtor company, the general nature of the debt to a sufficient degree that the director can assess whether there is a genuine dispute as to the existence or amount of the debt or an offsetting claim2 The courts are strict in their interpretation of statutory demands because of the potentially draconian effect of the presumption of insolvency that flows from them. For example, in B & M Quality Constructions Pty Ltd v WG Brady Pty Ltd?° the statutory demand referred to the creditor as ‘WG Brady Pty Ltd’ known to the plaintiff to be a non-existent company, instead of ‘W & J Brady Pty Ltd! The statutory demand was set aside. However, s 459J(2) makes it clear that the court must not set aside a statutory demand merely because of a defect. The court may only order that the demand be set aside if it is satisfied that a substantial injustice will be caused because of the defect.2! Assaf concludes that where a statutory demand ‘is likely to mislead, confuse or fail to properly inform the debtor of the substantive requirements of s 459E [it is] likely [to] cause substantial injustice within the meaning of s 459J(1)(a):22 Examples of defects which have been held to cause substantial injustice include where multiple debts were claimed in a demand and the amounts owing for the individual debts were not specified as required by s 459E(2)2 and where there was inadequate explanation of the conversion of a foreign debt into Australian currency.24 Acompany may also apply to set aside a statutory demand under s 459G where there is genuine dispute between the company and the creditor about the existence or the amount of a debt to which the demand relates and/or the company has an offsetting claim (s 459H). In Thomson v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd,* the Queensland Court of Appeal usefully reviewed the case law on the meaning of ‘genuine dispute’ and the court’s role in deciding such applications, noting that’a genuine dispute means there must be a plausible contention requiring investigation, adding that ‘[t]the court is not called on to determine the merits of, or to resolve, the dispute’. Section 459H sets out a formula the court must apply in calculating the substantiated amount of the demand: an offsetting claim must be subtracted from the total. An offsetting claim is a genuine claim that the company has against the creditor by way of counterclaim, set-off or cross-demand. For example, in Elm Financial Services Pty Ltd v MacDougal,26 Mr MacDougal had been retained by Mr Elm as a financial adviser and securities dealer. He served a statutory demand on Elm for the commissions due to him under this arrangement. The company argued that the demand should be set aside because MacDougal had received secret profits in breach of his duties to the company as its agent. Barrett J held that this constituted an offsetting claim that justified the setting aside of the statutory demand. The arrangements that are made between securities dealers and financial advisers and their principals are discussed in Chapters 17 and 18, respectively. Statutory demands are commonly used as a debt recovery strategy even though the statutory demand process should not be used to recover debts from companies that are plainly solvent.2 Solvency does not of itself constitute a reason to set aside a statutory demand although proof of the company’s solvency may be a ground to set aside the statutory demand due to substantial injustice under s 459J(1)(a)#8 and may result in the court refusing to make a winding up order under s 4594.22 If the statutory demand is not set aside, once the period of time for compliance with the statutory demand has elapsed, the creditor may rely upon the failure of the company to comply with the statutory demand to apply to wind up the company. In accordance with s 459Q, the creditor must file an application that sets out particulars of the service of the demand, a copy of the demand, and an affidavit of debt. If the company is seeking to avoid the winding up, it must have any statutory demand set aside before it is relied upon by the creditor in the winding up application. Leave of the court is required to oppose an application for a winding up in insolvency based on a failure to comply with a statutory demand. The debtor company cannot rely on matters at the winding up hearing that could have been raised beforehand.22 The procedure for lodging an application to wind up a company is dealt with under the Court Rules.2! After the filing of an application, the court may appoint a provisional liquidator to protect the company’s assets and to maintain the status quo pending the hearing of the application. Provisional liquidations are discussed below. The court has discretion to make a winding up order under s 459A. Generally, where the company is insolvent, a person with standing—a person listed in s 459P (as discussed above at Section 16.15.10)—may obtain an order unless the application is an abuse of process?2 (for example, where the defendant company was the ‘alter ego’ of the plaintiff and her former husband and the alleged debt was the subject of proceedings before the Family Court) or the company is solvent34 An order by the court that an insolvent company be wound up in insolvency under s 459A is made in favour of all creditors and contributories. The applicant acts in the proceedings in a representative capacity. Occasionally, the court will refuse the order because other creditors oppose it on the grounds that their interests would be better served by the company being under another form of external administration—such as a scheme of arrangement or voluntary administration—rather than liquidation2= Upon making a winding up order, the court appoints a liquidator to the company. This terminology is explained below.
## 16.15.30 Court order to wind up the company: procedure

There is a strict procedure when a creditor applies for a court order to wind up a company where the order is based on an unsatisfied statutory demand. As stated above, this is the most common type of winding up order for insolvency, and due to potentially draconian effects of a winding up order, compliance with the requirements is closely monitored by the court. Applications can be made in the state and territory Supreme Courts as well as the Federal Court (referred to as ‘the Court’ below). Harmonised court rules (for example, the Federal Court (Corporations) Rules 2000)2 apply to these proceedings across these jurisdictions. The procedure is set out in Corporations Information Sheet 1 issued by the Federal Court.2 In summary, it involves the following steps: Upon making a winding up order, the court appoints a liquidator to the company.2® This terminology is explained below.

## 16.15.30 Court order to wind up the company: procedure

The procedure is set out in Corporations Information Sheet 1 issued by the Federal Court.28 In summary, it involves the following steps: (1). The creditor makes an application under s 459P within three months of the company’s failure to comply with the statutory demand. As discussed above at Section 16.15.15, there is a presumption of insolvency if a company fails to comply with a statutory demand within the time provided. (2). The necessary affidavits are filed with the court, confirming that the statutory demand process was complied with. (3). The originating process (the documents by which the civil proceedings are commenced) and the supporting affidavits are served on the defendant company. (4). ASIC is notified by the plaintiff of the application for winding up orders.

(5). The plaintiff obtains the consent of a registered liquidator, should the order be made, and filing the Consent to Act form. The registration of liquidators is discussed below at Section 16.20.05. (6). Notice of the application is published by the plaintiff on the ASIC website. (7). The court hears the application. Generally, a winding up order will be made if the court is satisfied that the formal requirements under the Corporations Act and Corporations Rules have been met. (8). If the application is granted, and the winding up order made, the liquidator is notified, notice of the order is lodged with ASIC, and a copy of the order is served on the company.

## 16.15.35 Effect of a winding up in insolvency

A court-ordered winding up is taken to commence on the day on which the order is made.22 There may be variations to this commencement date. For example, where the company was previously under a voluntary administration, or has entered into a deed of company arrangement (DOCA), the winding up will commence when the administration began.“2 A separate date that delimits the period within which the liquidator may claw back transactions is called the ‘relation-back’ day. The relation-back day is defined as the day on which the winding up application was filed*! or another date if, before the order was made, the company was under administration or subject to a deed of company arrangement or a voluntary winding up“? The relation-back day is referred to in multiple provisions which deal with voidable transactions. The voidable transaction provisions are discussed below at Section 16.25. Thin tmmadinta affact af thas

## 16.15.35 Effect of a winding up in insolvency

The immediate effect of the winding up order is that the company ceases to carry on business except to the extent necessary to enable the liquidator to perform their functions. The directors and secretary of the company are obliged to submit a report to the liquidator regarding the affairs of the company.*? If the liquidator’s inquiries reveal that officers or employees of the company have committed offences, been negligent, have otherwise breached their duties, misappropriated money or property, or if the company is unable to pay creditors more than 50 cents in the dollar, the liquidator must lodge a report with ASIC 44 Finally, after the liquidator has realised the company’s property by converting the property into proceeds and distributed any payments to creditors—called, somewhat confusingly, ‘dividends’-—and made a final return to contributories, the liquidator applies to the court to be released and for ASIC to deregister the company4= There are significant limitations on what the company and its officers can do after the commencement of a winding up in insolvency by the court. Although the directors remain in office, the liquidator takes custody and control of the company’s property. Further, the company cannot dispose of any of its property without a court order. Any purported disposition without such an order is void.42 The word ‘disposition’ is given a wide interpretation by the courts and includes sale, encumbrance, mortgage, and payments of money.“8 This prohibition does not apply to dispositions by the liquidator or administrator or a disposition made pursuant to a deed of company arrangement.*2 With the commencement of the winding up, members lose their rights to transfer their shares unless the liquidator consents, and their rights cannot be varied without such consent22 Awinding up order by the court operates in favour of all creditors and contributories even though they have not been a party to the application! The general policy of liquidation requires that the assets be fairly distributed in accordance with the process set out in s 553 and the priorities nominated in ss 555 and 556. Individual efforts by creditors to obtain payment of their debts is discouraged. All debts of the company are automatically frozen at the date of liquidation. A person cannot, without the leave of the court, begin or proceed with: * acourt proceeding against the company or in relation to its property; or * any enforcement process in relation to its property=2

The object of these restrictions is to prevent the assets of the company being dissipated in litigation and to oblige creditors to prove their claims or debts in the winding up22 The process by which creditors prove their debts is discussed below at Section 16.20.15. The restrictions also prevent a particular creditor from gaining an advantage over the general body of creditors by proceeding to judgment and execution against the property of an insolvent company=4

## 16.15.35 Effect of a winding up in insolvency
creditors—called, somewhat confusingly, ‘dividends’-—and made a final return to contributories, the liquidator applies to the court to be released and for ASIC to deregister the company.4= Employees who remain with the company are discharged at the relevant date. The meaning of ‘relevant date’ in this context is discussed below. However, such employees have a right to payment for arrears of wages or other entitlements in priority to certain other creditors.> This is discussed below at Section 16.30. QC) Loading. Please wait

The primary task of the liquidator is to gather the company’s assets, sell them to realise some proceeds, and then distribute the proceeds among those entitled to them. In undertaking these tasks, liquidators are subject to extensive duties. If the company is solvent, the proceeds are distributed among creditors and shareholders. If the company is insolvent, the proceeds must be distributed among the creditors according to the priority principles that are discussed below at Section 16.30.

## 16.20.05 Registration and appointment of liquidators
An individual can apply to ASIC for registration as a liquidator.2= Liquidators are placed on a rotating list for appointment upon the making of a winding up order by the court, although a plaintiff will often nominate a liquidator. The plaintiff is required to file the liquidator’s consent to the appointment with the court28 Liquidators must be independent of the company and its management. There may be a problem of conflict of interest if there has been a past or present association between the liquidator and the company. As discussed below at Section 16.20.15, the liquidator is an officer of the company.52 Where a liquidation is ordered by the court, liquidators have duties to the court as well as obligations to protect the interests of the company. If a conflict arises between the two sets of responsibilities, the liquidator may apply to the court for directions on how to proceed. ASIC or the court may also appoint a reviewing liquidator to carry out a review of a particular aspect of the liquidation. The liquidator owes responsibilities to a wide range of interests in a liquidation: the creditors, the company, the shareholders, the regulators, the courts, and the community. As noted by Murray and Harris, the liquidator has no ‘client’/—rather, a number of stakeholders—and this unique position confers considerable powers upon the liquidator.2 However, the powers of the liquidator are counterbalanced by fiduciary duties which are discussed below. It is important to note the difference between a liquidator and a provisional liquidator. The court may appoint a provisional liquidator after the filing of an application to wind up a company and before the making of a winding up order.©2 When a provisional liquidation is ordered, a provisional liquidator takes control of the company on an interim basis to maintain the status quo while the winding up application is being determined. This appointment may alleviate the liability of directors for insolvent trading during the term of the appointment.

## 16.20.10 Powers of liquidators
The powers of the liquidator in a compulsory winding up are listed in s 477 and divided into two categories: general and specific.

+ The general powers in s 477(1) include the power to carry on the company’s business for the purpose of winding up the company, pay any class of credi-
tors in full, and to make arrangements or compromises with creditors.

+ The specific powers in s 477(2) include the power to bring or defend any legal proceedings in the name of and on behalf of the company (for example, to
sue to recover debts owed to the company); to appoint a solicitor; to sign documents on the company’s behalf and use its common seal for that purpose; to sell or dispose of any property of the company; to make calls on contributories; and—as a catch-all—to do all things necessary for winding up the affairs of the company and distributing its property. Ina voluntary winding up, s 506 authorises the liquidator to exercise any of the powers conferred upon a liquidator in a compulsory winding up.

## 16.20.15 Duties of the liquidator

Liquidators owe significant responsibilities to the company, which have been described by Nosworthy and Symes as a hybrid of agency, statutory and fiduciary duties.©° The characterisation of the relationship as ‘fiduciary’ means that the liquidator must avoid conflicts of interest®2 and is prohibited from making secret profits. As an agent, the liquidator will be required to perform their duties with skill and care, and failure to do so may render the liquidator liable for negligence at common law-2 The liquidator is also an officer of the company22 and owes the company the duties under ss 180-184 of the Corporations ActZ1 As

## 16.20.10 Powers of liquidators

The powers of the liquidator in a compulsory winding up are listed in s 477 and divided into two categories: general and specific.

## 16.20.15 Duties of the liquidator ActZ1 As

## 16.20.10 Powers of liquidators

## 16.20.15 Duties of the liquidator

Liquidators owe significant responsibilities to the company, which have been described by Nosworthy and Symes as a hybrid of agency, statutory and fiduciary duties.©° The characterisation of the relationship as ‘fiduciary’ means that the liquidator must avoid conflicts of interest®2 and is prohibited from making secret profits. As an agent, the liquidator will be required to perform their duties with skill and care, and failure to do so may render the liquidator liable for negligence at common law? The liquidator is also an officer of the company and owes the company the duties under ss 180-184 of the Corporations ActZ1 As stated above, a liquidator appointed in a compulsory winding up order is an officer of the court, and has responsibilities to the court 22 Other duties of the liquidator are as follows:
to collect company assets72 to consider if it is necessary to draw up a list of contributories”4 to realise company assets2> to report on and investigate the company’s affairs7® to repay the company’s debts2Z to distribute surplus assets78 to bring about dissolution of the company22 When exercising these powers, liquidators must use their commercial and professional judgment in determining any course of action 22 Prior to the distribution of the proceeds from the sale of assets, creditors must ‘prove’ their debt to the liquidator to be entitled to receive a portion of the proceeds on winding up. This follows from the obligation of the liquidator under s 478 to ‘cause the company’s property to be collected and applied in discharging the company’s liabilities’ and ‘to settle a list of contributories: As discussed above, the word ‘contributories’ includes both shareholders and creditors. A creditor who wishes to participate in a liquidation must lodge a proof of debt with the liquidator and the liquidator must decide whether to accept or reject the proof of debt. Unpaid dividends are regarded as debts due to shareholders, but in order to prove the debt the shares must be fully paid (s 553A). If the liquidator accepts the proof of debt, the creditor will be entitled to repayment of some or all of their debt. If the company is insolvent, creditors are paid a proportion of the debts that are owed to them. Debts are repaid equally, so that if there are insufficient funds to repay all debts in full creditors are to be paid in proportion to their debts (s 555). Section 553 states that debts and claims are provable in a winding up. The meaning of ‘debt’ is discussed in Chapter 15 at Section 15.10 and above at Section
## 16.15.20. However, a ‘claim’ is wider, and claims that are admissible to proof of debt against the company may be present or future, certain or contingent, as- Epes oOo
pra Soe meen coon on Cap cog COI ORO ID OE SO EE COO Other duties of the liquidator are as follows:
to collect company assets72 to realise company assets2> to report on and investigate the company’s affairs2® to repay the company’s debts2Z to distribute surplus assets78 certained or sounding only in damages (s 553). A complex area is the projected compensation for claims in tort—for example, for personal injuries—both present and future. Prior to 1992, claims for damages in tort were not provable in a winding up; however, the Corporations Act was amended following the recommendations of the Harmer Report.®! Section 554A sets out a methodology for the liquidator to determine the amount of debts and claims that are of ‘uncertain value. However, the treatment of product liability claims is an ongoing challenge particularly for latent injuries such as asbestos-related diseases. In these cases, the injuries may manifest a long time after the company has been wound up and there may have been no provisioning for the claims. It has been suggested that a trust be created for future claimants when certain companies are wound up to address this issue.£2

## 16.25.05 Introduction

The liquidator collects the company’s property or assets during the liquidation. This includes property that belongs to the company at the commencement of the winding up together with property retrieved by the liquidator taking action on behalf of the company under pt 5.7B div 2 of the Corporations Act. This Part is titled ‘Recovering property or compensation for the benefit of creditors of insolvent companies]: These provisions enable creditors to have full access to the company’s property so that, as far as possible, their debts can be repaid. The purpose of pt 5.7B div 2 is to ensure that the liquidator can recover property disposed of by the company prior to the winding up. Creditors’ rights can be defeated by transfers of property prior to the appointment of a liquidator. The most prominent examples are transfers to creditors in preference to the general body of creditors and transfers of company property for an amount less than its true value. The provisions discussed below allow the liquidator in certain circumstances to ‘clawback’ property disposed of prior to the winding up. The liquidator will apply to the court to have the relevant transaction set aside. If the transaction is voided by the court the creditor may lodge its proof of debt and, if the liquidator accepts the debt, the creditor will receive its proportionate share of the debt with all other creditors.83 The liquidator’s power to clawback property depends upon the nature of the transaction and its timing.®4 By way of overview, there are several types of transactions that are voidable: (1) unfair preferences (s 588FA) (2) uncommercial transactions (s 588FB) (3) unfair loans (s 588FD) (4) unreasonable director-related transactions (s 588FDA) (5) creditor-defeating disposition (s 588FDB) (6) invalid circulating security interest (s 588FJ).

Categories 1-2 are only voidable if they are also ‘insolvent transactions, as defined in s 588FC. Therefore, the insolvency of the company must be proved for the transaction to be set aside. Categories 3-5 usually involve companies being wound up in insolvency but the relevant provisions independently stipulate the elements that need to be proved by the person who is seeking to set the transaction aside. Categories 1-6 are discussed below. In addition, there are composite provisions which require proof of an insolvency transaction but have an aggravated element such as a related party dealing (s 588FE(4)) or an obstruction of creditors’ rights (s 558FE(5)). Note that some transactions may fall within several of the categories; for example, it may constitute an unfair preference and an uncommercial transaction.£5 This overlap has been judicially recognised®° and the liquidator may argue that a transaction falls within several alternative categories in pt 5.7B div 2 when seeking relief to avoid the transaction. As regards timing, creditors are entitled to the company’s property for a period backdated from the relevant relation-back day. The relation-back day is discussed above at Section 16.15.35. Asa rule of thumb, the period of backdating from the relation-back day reflects the gravity of the moral hazard associated with different types of transaction. Therefore, the liquidator has different timeframes within which he or she can clawback property according to the moral turpitude of the transaction; for example, there will be a longer timeframe allotted to the liquidator to query transactions involving directors or transactions that obstruct creditors. The clawback period for an insolvent transaction that is an undue preference is six months;#2 whereas an unreasonable director-related transaction is four years® and an insolvent transaction made for the purpose of prejudicing or obstructing creditors rights is 10 years.22 Some of the relevant clawback periods are set out in Table 16.1. Table 16.1 Transactions Insolvent and unfair preference 6 months Creditor-defeating disposition?! 12 months Insolvent and uncommercial transaction? 2years An unfair preference is defined in s 588FA(1) as having been given where:

(a) the company and the creditor are parties to the transaction (even if someone else is also a party); and (b) the transaction results in the creditor receiving from the company, in respect of an unsecured debt that the company owes to the creditor, more than the creditor would receive from the company in respect of the debt if the transaction were set aside and the creditor were to prove for the debt in a winding up of the company. The purpose of s 588FA was examined by the Victorian Court of Appeal in Commonwealth v Byrnes.22 The Court stated: It has consistently been a primary objective of both individual and corporate insolvency legislation to promote the equitable treatment of unsecured creditors. The statutory regimes for achieving that goal have, throughout successive enactments, comprised a number of essential features. In general terms, the insolvent’s property is to be made available for the equal satisfaction of the creditors’ claims. ... One manifestation of the general policy of insolvency law to treat all unsecured creditors equally is the statutory provisions which enable payments validly made to creditors in the period shortly before the insolvency, which have the effect of giving that creditor a preference over other creditors, to be recovered.® Typically, an unfair preference occurs when an insolvent company repays a debt to a creditor prior to the commencement of the winding up. For example, assume that a family member has lent money to the company and the company is having difficulties paying its debts. The director considers whether to put the company into voluntary administration but, upon finding out that the family member would only receive a fraction of the debt in a voluntary administration, directs the company to repay the debt in full. If the company is subsequently wound up during the relevant clawback period, the payment to the family member may be an unfair preference. The courts have noted that the provision is directed against unfair preferences; therefore, the court should look at the ‘ultimate effect’ of the ‘entire transaction’ before determining whether it has involved an unfair preference within the meaning of s 588FA.22 This includes where the company arranges for a third party to repay a debt that the third party owes to the company’s creditor122 The general course of dealings between the company and the creditor has to be considered, so that one transaction that is part of a series of transactions forming an integral part of a continuing business relationship is not considered in isolation (s 588FA(3))2™ This is often referred to as a ‘running account defence’®2 although the legislation phrases it as an‘exemption’ rather than a ‘defence’ A running account describes an ongoing relationship between a creditor and the company where goods are supplied on a predetermined schedule, often on credit. As described by the High Court in Bryant v Badenoch Integrated Logging Pty Ltd:

‘The “running account principle” recognises that a creditor who continues to supply a company on a running account in circumstances of suspected or potential insolvency enables the company to continue to trade to the likely benefit of all creditors. The prescription of periods within which all transactions in a continuing business relationship are deemed to be a “single transaction” and, accordingly, may be netted off against each other to determine any unfair preference serves this purpose.1% In Airservices Australia v Ferrier (‘Airservices’),°4 the majority of the High Court considered that the purpose of a payment under a running account provided the context to determine whether or not the payment has the ‘ultimate effect’ of giving an unfair preference: if the purpose of the payment is to induce the creditor to provide further goods or services as well as to discharge an existing indebtedness, the payment will not be a preference unless the payment exceeds the value of the goods or services acquired. In such a case a court ... looks to the ultimate effect of the transaction. ... If at the end of a series of dealings, the creditor has supplied goods to a greater value than the payments made to it during that period, the general body of creditors are not disadvantaged by the transaction - they may even be better off. The supplying creditor, therefore, has received no preference. Consequently a debtor does not prefer a creditor merely because it makes irregular payments under an express or tacit arrangement with the creditor that, while the debtor makes payments, the creditor will continue to supply goods.15 In Airservices Australia v Ferrier (‘Airservices’),!°4 the majority of the High Court considered that the purpose of a payment under a running account provided the context to determine whether or not the payment has the ‘ultimate effect’ of giving an unfair preference: The continuous business relationship test under s 588FA(3)(a) recognises that the company’s indebtedness to the creditor will increase and decrease from time to time as a result of the transactions between them. This is treated as a single transaction if the ‘net outcome, if any, in favour of the creditor from that single transaction is the amount of the preference’ In previous editions of this book, we noted that, in the past, the alleged preference has been calculated by reference to the ‘peak indebtedness rule’ first articulated by Barwick CJ in Rees v Bank of New South Wales.1®2 In 2023, this approach was rejected by the High Court in Bryant v Badenoch Integrated Logging Pty Ltd, which held that the ‘so-called’ peak indebtedness rule does not form part of s 588FA(3).%8 Instead, a liquidator should look at all transactions that have occurred within the statutory period to determine whether there has been a decrease in the company’s indebtedness that can be argued to be an unfair preference, particularly where the purpose of the payment was to induce a continued commercial relation- ship between the parties. An unfair preference will be set aside under s 588FF if it is an insolvent transaction and a voidable transaction. In this circumstance, the recipient will be required to disgorge the benefit received in favour of the liquidator who will use the money or property recovered to enlarge the pool to be distributed among the general body of creditors.1°2

## 16.25.15 Uncommercial transactions

An uncommercial transaction involves the company selling or giving away assets or incurring liabilities without receiving adequate consideration. The aim of these transactions may be to put assets out of the reach of creditors. The provisions in the Corporations Act are aimed at preventing the company disposing of its assets in a manner that cannot be explained by normal commercial practice, and act as a deterrent against company controllers transferring its assets for not be a preference unless the payment exceeds the value of the goods or services acquired. In such a case a court ... looks to the ultimate effect of the transaction. ... If at the end of a series of dealings, the creditor has supplied goods to a greater value than the payments made to it during that period, the general body of creditors are not disadvantaged by the transaction - they may even be better off. The supplying creditor, therefore, has received no preference. Consequently a debtor does not prefer a creditor merely because it makes irregular payments under an express or tacit arrangement with the creditor that, while the debtor makes payments, the creditor will continue to supply goods.15 The continuous business relationship test under s 588FA(3)(a) recognises that the company’s indebtedness to the creditor will increase and decrease from time to time as a result of the transactions between them. This is treated as a single transaction if the ‘net outcome, if any, in favour of the creditor from that single transaction is the amount of the preference’! In previous editions of this book, we noted that, in the past, the alleged preference has been calculated by reference to the ‘peak indebtedness rule’ first articulated by Barwick CJ in Rees v Bank of New South Wales.1®2 In 2023, this approach was rejected by the High Court in Bryant v Badenoch Integrated Logging Pty Ltd, which held that the ‘so-called’ peak indebtedness rule does not form part of s 588FA(3).%8 Instead, a liquidator should look at all transactions that have occurred within the statutory period to determine whether there has been a decrease in the company’s indebtedness that can be argued to be an unfair preference, particularly where the purpose of the payment was to induce a continued commercial relationship between the parties.

## 16.25.15 Uncommercial transactions

An uncommercial transaction involves the company selling or giving away assets or incurring liabilities without receiving adequate consideration. The aim of these transactions may be to put assets out of the reach of creditors. The provisions in the Corporations Act are aimed at preventing the company disposing of its assets in a manner that cannot be explained by normal commercial practice, and act as a deterrent against company controllers transferring its assets for less than fair value. To use a simple example, assume that a company owns a recent model Maserati sports car and sells it to the daughter of a director for $10,000 during the clawback period. This would likely constitute an uncommercial transaction. Pursuant to s 588FB(1), a transaction is an uncommercial transaction if it may be expected that a reasonable person in the company’s circumstances would not have entered into the transaction, having regard to: (a) the benefits (if any) to the company of entering into the transaction; and (b) the detriment to the company of entering into the transaction; and (c) the respective benefits to other parties to the transaction of entering into it; and (d) any other relevant matter In Capital Finance Australia Ltd v Tolcher12 Gordon J summarised the relevant principles pertaining to s 588FB as follows: (1) as the express words of s 588FB make clear, it is an objective standard to determine if a transaction is uncommercial; (2) four criteria are to be considered—the benefits enjoyed by the company (s 588FB(1)(a)), the detriment to the company (s 588FB(1)(b)), the respective benefits others received (s 588FB(1)(c)), and any other relevant matters (s 588FB(1)(d)); (3) the objective criteria [as stipulated in ss 588FB(1)(a)-(d) set out above] are not considered in some vacuum but by reference to‘the company’s circumstances’ which must include the state of knowledge of those who were the directing mind of the company, such as its controlling director or directors; and (4) for a transaction to be ‘uncommercial’ it must result in ‘the recipient receiving a gift or obtaining a bargain of such magnitude that it [cannot] be explained by normal commercial practice or where ‘the consideration ... lacks a “commercial quality” For example, in Great Investments Ltd v Warner,2 $6 million in convertible bonds was transferred from the company to a director as part payment for his own personal debts. The company was insolvent at the time, the transactions could not be explained by ‘normal commercial practice, and the company derived no benefit from the transaction24 For example, in Great Investments Ltd v Warner,2 $6 million in convertible bonds was transferred from the company to a director as part payment for his own personal debts. The company was insolvent at the time, the transactions could not be explained by ‘normal commercial practice, and the company derived no benefit from the transaction. An uncommercial transaction does not have to involve a transaction between the company and one of its creditors; it may be entered into by the company and any other person.1!4 Examples are where the recipient receives a gift or the company disposes of property at less than its market value Courts will scrutinise transactions at undervalue carefully, particularly if the purchaser is a related corporate entity or a related person116 An uncommercial transaction will be set aside under s 588FF if it is an insolvent transaction and a voidable transaction. Uncommercial transactions are illustrated by Super Art Australia Pty Ltd v Foden" (‘Super Art’) at Section 16.25.55 below. In this case, a loan agreement and a mortgage debenture agreement (the mortgage) were found to be uncommercial transactions because there was no benefit to the company, as no funds had been advanced by the creditor and the transactions converted a pre-existing liability from an unsecured to a secured debt thereby disadvantaging other creditors.

## 16.25.20 Insolvent transactions

Before a transaction may be declared void as an unfair preference or uncommercial transaction, it must be an insolvent transaction. An ‘insolvent transaction’ is defined in s 588FC as an unfair preference or uncommercial transaction and: {a) the transaction is entered into (or effected) at a time when the company is insolvent; or (b) the company becomes insolvent because of entering into (or effecting) the transaction. As discussed in Chapter 15 (at Section 15.10), the court may make various presumptions about insolvency under s 588E, including where the company was insolvent at any time during the previous 12 months, or where the company failed to keep adequate financial records. These presumptions may be rebutted by proof to the contrary.18

## 16.25.25 Unfair loans

Pursuant to s 588FD, a loan is unfair where the interest or charges on the loan were or have become (because of a variation) extortionate. The factors to be considered when deciding if a loan is extortionate are set out in s 588FD(2): * the risk to which the lender was exposed

## 16.25.20 Insolvent transactions

## 16.25.25 Unfair loans
the risk to which the lender was exposed the value of any security in respect of the loan the term of the loan the schedule for payments of interest and charges and for repayments of principal the amount of the loan any other relevant matter. As noted in Table 16.1, there is no relation-back period that applies to unfair loans, so any loan, no matter when it was given, may be challenged. Further, it is not necessary for the liquidator to prove that the loan was an insolvent transaction—that the company was insolvent at the time the loan was given or it became insolvent as a consequence of the loan—in order for the loan to be declared void. The court will scrutinise the loan carefully where the interest rates are high? However, in Re Essendon Apartment Developments Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 2)/2° loans that carried interest rates of 60 per cent and 70 per cent per annum were held not to be unfair loans because the lender assumed a high level of risk—a second mortgage over an undeveloped property—and no evidence had been led to prove the interest rate was extortionate.
## 16.25.30 Unreasonable director-related transactions

Section 588FDA regulates unreasonable payments made to directors and their associates. The provision targets certain transactions—such as payments, disposition of property, or an issue of securities—made by the company to a director or a close associate of a director or for the benefit of the director or close associate. The term ‘close associate’ is defined in s 9 to mean a relative of the director or their spouse. ‘Relative’ is also defined in s 9 to mean a person's spouse, parent or remoter lineal ancestor, child or remoter issue, or brother or sister. The provision is clearly directed at bonuses given to directors prior to liquidation. However, it has a wider operation because it applies to ‘unreasonable transactions. Nettle JA stated in Vasudevan (as joint and several liquidator of Wulguru Retail Investments Pty Ltd) (in liq) v Becon Constructions (Australia) Pty Ltd that: Section 588FDA is self-evidently an anti-avoidance provision aimed at preventing errant directors from stripping benefits out of companies to their own advantage! Nettle JA concluded that ’benefit’in s 588FDA includes both direct and indirect benefits.122 Section 588FDA is self-evidently an anti-avoidance provision aimed at preventing errant directors from stripping benefits out of companies to their own advantage! The reasonableness of the transaction is to be assessed by the factors set out in s 588FDA(1)(c). It will be unreasonable if a reasonable person in the company’s circumstances would not have entered into the transaction, having regard to: (a) the benefits (if any) to the company of entering into the transaction; and (b) the detriment to the company of entering into the transaction; and (c) the respective benefits to other parties to the transaction of entering into it; and (d) any other relevant matter.

The test of unreasonableness in s 588FDA(1)(c) is objective: it is ‘what a reasonable person in the company’s circumstances may be expected not to do! Further, the ‘company’s circumstancesencompass all relevant matters, starting with its status as a company and what flows from that; its controllers, shareholders, business and other activities; and the facts and circumstances of, and surrounding, the transaction’!#4 Gleeson J reviewed the authorities on s 588FDA in Smith (in his capacity as liquidator of Action Paintball Games Pty Ltd) (in liq) v Starke (No 2)25 Her Honour discerned the following principles:

(a) Impropriety or breach of director's duty is not necessary to establish an unreasonable director-related transaction ... (b) The inquiry under s 588FDA(1)(c) is concerned with the reasonableness of the company’s conduct, objectively assessed ... (c) The inquiry under s 588FDA(1)(c) is conducted by reference to the company’s circumstances, encompassing all relevant matters .... (d) Normal commercial practice is a relevant but not determinative matter in conducting the s 588FDA(1)(c) inquiry ... (e) A transaction of derivative benefit only can still be for the benefit of the company .. 12 Note the findings of Davies J in Super Art Australia Pty Ltd v Foden'22 below at Section 16.25.55. As discussed above at Section 16.25.15, the loan and the mortgage were uncommercial transactions because the company derived no benefit from the transaction and the conversion from an unsecured to a secured debt disadvantaged creditors. The fact that Foden was a director at the time of the transaction also meant that the transactions were unreasonable directorrelated transactions under s 588FDA. In the Maserati example given above at Section 16.25.15, the daughter who receives the car is a close associate of the director because she is the child of a director (s 9). The transfer of the Maserati appears to be unreasonable and made for the benefit of the daughter rather than the company.

## 16.25.35 Creditor-defeating dispositions

Section 588FE(6B) and related sections address the situation where directors of a comnanv that is in financial trouble cause the comnanv's assets to be trans-

## 16.25.35 Creditor-defeating dispositions

Section 588FE(6B) and related sections address the situation where directors of a company that is in financial trouble cause the company’s assets to be transferred to a second, unrelated company that is controlled by the same people, with the result that the assets are now beyond the reach of the first company’s creditors. This practice is known colloquially as ‘phoenixing, because it is intended that the business will ‘rise from the ashes’ of the first company, using the assets that are now under the control of the second company.!28 Instead of ‘phoenixing, s 588FDB labels this a‘creditor-defeating disposition’ Acreditor-defeating disposition occurs when the consideration paid for a disposition of company property is less than either the market value of the property or the best price that was reasonably obtainable (whichever is the lesser amount) and the disposition either prevents the property from being available for the benefit of the company’s creditors or it hinders or significantly delays the process of making the property so available (s 588FDB(1)). This type of transaction is voidable under s 588FE(6B) if it occurs during the relevant period (see Table 16.1) and the company was insolvent at the time, or became insolvent because of the transaction, or the company went into external administration because of the transaction less than 12 months after it occurred. Uniquely, s S88FGAA gives ASIC the power, under certain conditions, to make orders against a person who has received property or money as the result of a creditor-defeating transaction. On the face of it, this might be interpreted as an attempt to confer judicial power on a Commonwealth agency. The curiously worded sub-s (4) appears to be aimed at addressing this, stating that ASIC cannot make an order if it has reason to believe that ‘if it were a court’, s 588FG (discussed below at Section 16.25.50) would prevent it from making an order. Further, s 588FGAE allows a court to set aside an order made by ASIC under s 588FGAA. Finally, ss 588GAA-GAC impose duties on company officers to prevent creditor-defeating dispositions (discussed in Chapter 11 at Section 11.25.20).

## 16.25.40 Invalid circulating security interests

Assets subject to a security interest held by a secured creditor do not form part of the pool that may be distributed to creditors by the liquidator. The term ‘secured creditor’ is defined and explained above in Chapter 15 at Section 15.15. A common type of security interest is a circulating security interest, formerly known as a ‘floating charge; that allows a creditor to create a security interest in the company’s circulating assets such as its inventory. Secured creditors are not generally affected by the liquidation process, unless the value of their security does not cover the extent of the company’s debt owed to them, or if they lose the benefit of their security interest, as discussed below at Section 16.30. When a company is compulsorily wound up, s 588FJ requires that certain circulating security interests are void against the liquidator. The provision is designed to prevent companies on the verge of insolvency securing past debts by granting a circulating security interest over their assets in favour of particular creditors or to capture property acquired by the company prior to the winding up so as to remove those assets from the control of the liquidator. The security interest is often created in favour of the company’s controllers. Section 588FJ covers situations where a circulating security interest is created within the period six months before the relation-back day. In such a case, unless it is proved the company was still solvent, the charge is void as against the liquidator except insofar as it secures money already paid or a guarantee already given or goods and services already supplied to the company.122

## 16.25.45 Voidable transactions: consequences

## 16.25.40 Invalid circulating security interests

Assets subject to a security interest held by a secured creditor do not form part of the pool that may be distributed to creditors by the liquidator. The term ‘secured creditor’ is defined and explained above in Chapter 15 at Section 15.15. A common type of security interest is a circulating security interest, formerly known as a ‘floating charge; that allows a creditor to create a security interest in the company’s circulating assets such as its inventory. Secured creditors are not generally affected by the liquidation process, unless the value of their security does not cover the extent of the company’s debt owed to them, or if they lose the benefit of their security interest, as discussed below at Section 16.30.

## 16.25.45 Voidable transactions: consequences

To summarise the discussion so far: voidable transactions are unfair preferences or uncommercial transactions that amount to insolvent transactions, unfair loans, unreasonable director-related transactions, creditor-defeating dispositions, and invalid circulating security interests entered into during the applicable clawback period prior to the relation-back day. If the transaction is voidable, the court may make various orders set out in s 588FF. These include ordering the repayment of money paid by the company, the transfer of property back to the company, the repayment of the amount of any benefit received, or the discharge of a debt or security. The court may also declare a transaction to be unenforceable. However, where a creditor has returned an unfair preference, because of an order under s 588FF or for any other reason, the creditor has put the company into the same position as if the transaction had not been entered into, the creditor may prove its debt in the winding up (s 588Fl). In this situation, the creditor's rights or interests cannot be prejudiced by any (further) order of the court under s 588FF.

## 16.25.50 Transactions not voidable against certain people

Pursuant to s 588FG, the court cannot make an order about voidable transactions that prejudices any person (other than a party to the transaction) where it is proved that: the person received no benefit because of the transaction; or in relation to each benefit that the person received because of the transaction, the person received the benefit in good faith; and the person had no reasonable grounds for suspecting the company was insolvent at that time or would become insolvent; and a reasonable person in the person’s circumstances would have had no such grounds for so suspecting. when an unfair loan or an unreasonable director-related transaction is alleged, the person has provided valuable consideration under the transaction or has changed their position in reliance on the transaction. This so-called ‘defence’ under s 588FG is illustrated by the Super Art case below.

## 16.25.55 Voidable transactions: a case example

## 16.25.55 Voidable transactions: a case example

In Super Art Australia Pty Ltd v Foden,22 it was alleged the relevant transactions were uncommercial transactions, insolvent transactions, unreasonable director-related transactions, unfair loans, or invalid circulating security interests. Davies J's judgment provides a useful insight into how the various voidable transactions interact. In this case, an application was made by the liquidators of a Super Art Australia Pty Ltd (‘SAA’), for orders against the defendant (Mr Foden) under s 588FF. Foden was a former director, secretary and shareholder of SAA and was also SAA‘s accountant before it was ordered to be wound up in insolvency. SAA ran a business that involved the importation of mass-produced artworks from China for sale at staged events and public venues throughout Australia, such as the Royal Adelaide Showgrounds and Melbourne Exhibition Centre. The liquidators alleged that, during the relation-back period, SAA made three payments to Foden totalling $429,000, referred to in the judgment respectively as payments (1), (2) and (3). Payment (1) was $215,000, payment (2) was $14,000, and payment (3) was $200,000. These payments were allegedly made for accountancy and other services provided by Foden to SAA from mid-September 2007. The liquidators alleged that SAA (as borrower) and Foden (as lender) executed a loan agreement (‘loan agreement’) by which Foden agreed to lend SAA the sum of $215,000. Further, the liquidators alleged that SAA executed a debenture agreement which charged all of the company’s undertaking and all of its assets in favour of Foden to secure the repayment of the loan amounts (‘the mortgage debenture agreement’). As stated by Davies J in the judgment: ‘The liquidators allege that:
a. the loan agreement, the mortgage ... and the three payments are ‘uncommercial transactions’ (s 588FB ...), ‘insolvent transactions’ (s 588FC), and/or ‘unreasonable director-related transactions’ (s 588FDA ...); b. the loan agreement is an ‘unfair loan’ (s 588FD ...); and c. the mortgage ... is a circulating security interest in property of SAA (ss 588FJ, 266 and 1504 ...). ‘The liquidators allege that the agreements and payments are voidable as against the liquidators and seek declarations and orders under s 588FF that the agreements are void as against the liquidators and that they are entitled to recover the amounts that SAA paid to ... Foden; an order that the mortgage ... be removed as a charge from the records of SAA; and an order that ... Foden pay the liquidators the sum of $429,000 plus interest.4! Further, the liquidators alleged that SAA executed a debenture agreement which charged all of the company’s undertaking and all of its assets in favour of Foden to secure the repayment of the loan amounts (‘the mortgage debenture agreement’). As stated by Davies J in the judgment: ‘The liquidators allege that:

Foden disputed the factual basis of the claims made against him by the liquidators. In relation to the loan agreement and the mortgage, her Honour found that the transactions were uncommercial transactions. First, no benefit was obtained by the company in relation to the dealing with Foden as no loan funds were advanced pursuant to the loan agreement. Second, if the purpose was to secure the payment of the fees owed to Foden, that liability had already been incurred by SAA and the effect of the charge was to convert that liability from an unsecured debt that the company owed to Foden to a secured debt. If that be the case, the benefit to ... Foden was significant in that it secured an existing indebtedness to ... Foden, with no corresponding commercial benefit for SAA. In either circumstance, it may be concluded that a reasonable person in the company’s circumstances would not have entered into those transactions.“ For the same reasons, her Honour found that the loan agreement and the mortgage were unreasonable director-related transactions as Foden was a director at the time of these transactions.133 Davies J also found (relying on a report provided by the liquidator) that the company was insolvent from December 2007 because, at that point, it was unable to pay its debts as and when they fell due under s 954.124 The report indicated that the insolvency of the company was due to a significant net cash deficiency throughout the period December 2007 to December 2008.125 This was evidenced, for example, by the company’s inability to fulfil orders that were paid in advance by customers.3& Accordingly, the loan agreement, the mortgage, and payment (1) were all insolvent transactions. Payment (1) was also was an unfair preference, taking into account the liquidator’s evidence that no return to the creditors of the company was expected.122 However, as regards the allegation that an unfair loan had been made, her Honour found that no loan had in fact been made by Foden to SAA pursuant to the loan agreement because no funds were advanced by Foden; therefore, s 588FD was not engaged.38 Foden raised the defence under s 588FG (discussed above at Section 16.25.50) but her Honour found that a reasonable person in his position would have ‘reason to suspect’ insolvency at the relevant time because an inquiry was called for into SAA’s capacity to pay its liabilities due to an earlier default in repayment of monies lent which had necessitated further borrowings. Therefore, the defence under s 588FG failed. Finally, the mortgage was expressed to be a fixed and floating charge and was alleged to be a circulating security interest for the purpose of s 588FJ. Her Honour found as follows: As it was created during the six months ending on the relation back day, and it did not secure an advance paid to the company by ... Foden at or after that time, the charge is void as against the liquidators in so far as it charged the assets of the company to secure repayment of the loan to ... Foden.42 c. the mortgage a circulating security interest in property of SAA (ss 588FJ, 266 and 1504 . If that be the case, the benefit to ... Foden was significant in that it secured an existing indebtedness to ... Foden, with no corresponding commercial benefit for SAA. In either circumstance, it may be concluded that a reasonable person in the company’s circumstances would not have entered into those transactions.42 In the result, the liquidators were entitled to the relief that they sought with respect to the loan agreement, the mortgage, and payment (1)42 The distinction between secured and unsecured creditors must first be considered when discussing payments to company creditors in a winding up. A secured creditor has a security interest, such as a mortgage, over some or all of the company’s property that can be called on to cover the debt owed to them by the company. Secured creditors have priority over unsecured creditors regarding claims over the company’s assets, in that they can enforce the terms of their security to recover payment of their claim. Therefore, in doing this they stand outside the winding up process. The interests of secured creditors are dealt with by the Personal Property Securities Act 2009 (Cth) (‘PPSA’). The operation of that Act is explained in Chapter 8 at Section 8.20.15. Building on that explanation, a secured creditor can lose the benefit of having a secured interest if they do not perfect the security (PPSA s 267), or they do perfect the security by registration but this occurs within the timeframes specified in s 588FL of the Corporations Act. In either of these events, the secured interest vests in the company and is then available to the liquidator for purposes of the winding up.4" The starting premise for payment of unsecured creditors out of the funds that are available for distribution is found in s 555 of the Corporations Act, which states that’all debts and claims proved in winding up rank equally; and where the funds are not sufficient to meet all claims in full, creditors must be paid proportionately. This is a reflection of the pari passu principle, meaning ‘on equal footing’ The principle is that in a winding up no creditor should receive preferential treatment in gaining access to the company’s funds. Relatedly, the Corporations Act embodies the idea that winding up is a collective process, meaning that each unsecured creditor abandons any individual right of action against the company and has their claim determined by collective proceedings. This idea is found in s 471B (which also allows the court to grant leave for individual action). The idea of a collective process is important in deciding how to distribute the re- maining assets of an insolvent company. As Anderson explains:

In the absence of sufficient assets to pay all creditors in full, sound and logical insolvency laws are needed to ensure an efficient and fair collection, realisation and distribution of the debtor’s remaining assets. The collective distribution regime upon liquidation aims to provide this, and allows for modification of pre-insolvency rights in favour of preferred creditors.“ The reference to ‘preferred creditors’ takes us to an important point: the application of the pari passu principle is qualified by the introductory words to s 555, ‘[elxcept as otherwise provided by this Act: The main exception to s 555 is found in the next section of the Act.!43 Section 556(1) lists 14 different classes of unsecured debts and claims against the company that must be paid in priority to all other unsecured debts and claims and must be paid in the order in which they are listed in the section. Section 556 does not cover the full range of unsecured creditors; it does not, for example, include unsecured trade credi- tors of a company. Before looking at the priority order of payments in s 556 it is worth noting that it can be affected by a ‘debt subordination’ agreement, as recognised in s 563C. A company creditor may agree that the debt (or part of the debt) owed to them will not be paid until the debt (or part of the debt) owed to another creditor is paid by the company. In other words, the first-mentioned debt is subordinated to the other debt. The purpose of such an agreement is to vary the statutory order of priority. The section recognises and permits such an arrangement provided that it does not disadvantage any other creditor who is not a party to the agreement. The pari passu principle applies within each of the classes listed in s 556. All debts and claims within a class of debts listed in each of the paragraphs in s 556(1) rank equally; if the funds are insufficient to meet them in full, they are to be paid proportionately (s 559). For explanatory purposes, the 14 classes of priority or preferential payments listed in s 556 can be grouped under two headings.“ First, there is a group of expenses and claims that relate to the process of winding up or administration. These are found in ss 556(1)(a)—(df). For example, the first class of debts is expenses properly incurred by a liquidator, provisional liquidator or administrator (referred to as a ‘relevant authority’) in the company and is then available to the liquidator for purposes of the winding up.4+ The starting premise for payment of unsecured creditors out of the funds that are available for distribution is found in s 555 of the Corporations Act, which states that’all debts and claims proved in winding up rank equally’, and where the funds are not sufficient to meet all claims in full, creditors must be paid proportionately. As Anderson explains:

In the absence of sufficient assets to pay all creditors in full, sound and logical insolvency laws are needed to ensure an efficient and fair collection, realisation and distribution of the debtor’s remaining assets. The collective distribution regime upon liquidation aims to provide this, and allows for modification of pre-insolvency rights in favour of preferred creditors.“ For explanatory purposes, the 14 classes of priority or preferential payments listed in s 556 can be grouped under two headings.“ First, there is a group of expenses and claims that relate to the process of winding up or administration. These are found in ss 556(1)(a)—(df). For example, the first class of debts is expenses properly incurred by a liquidator, provisional liquidator or administrator (referred to as a ‘relevant authority’) in‘preserving, realising, or getting in property of the company, or in carrying on the company’s business’ (s 556(1)(a)). This class of debt does not include remuneration or fees for service payable to, or certain expenses incurred by, the relevant authority; these are referred to as ‘deferred expenses’ and are ranked ninth in the order of payment priority (s 556(1)(de)). The second group of debts and claims are employee entitlements—remembering that an employee is a type of unsecured creditor. Amounts due to employees in the form of wages and superannuation entitlements, amounts due under industrial awards, and retrenchment payments are ranked eleventh, thirteenth and fourteenth, respectively, and are to be paid in that order (ss 556(1)(e), (g), (h)). There are specific limitations that apply to employees (called ‘excluded employees’ as defined in s 556(2)) who are directors, or spouses or relatives of directors; these limitations are dealt with in ss 556(1A)-(1C). Priority claims by these employees are limited to amounts of $1,500-$2,000, with the remainder of their claim falling into the general unsecured creditor pool to receive distribution pari passu under s 555. Accritical issue for employees of an insolvent company is the risk that there will be insufficient funds available to meet their claims. This is addressed by legislation separate to the Corporations Act. Under the Fair Entitlements Guarantee (FEG) scheme!“ an employee whose employment has ended due to the insolvency of their employer may apply for an advance to cover unpaid wages (up to 13 weeks), unpaid annual and long service leave, payment in lieu of notice fun te Fite siaale\ and radiundancy nay fun te fauriiaale nar vaar af cantical Thaca navmante ara fiindad hy tha Cammanuaalth Gavammant Thic echama Accritical issue for employees of an insolvent company is the risk that there will be insufficient funds available to meet their claims. This is addressed by legislation separate to the Corporations Act. Under the Fair Entitlements Guarantee (FEG) scheme!“ an employee whose employment has ended due to the insolvency of their employer may apply for an advance to cover unpaid wages (up to 13 weeks), unpaid annual and long service leave, payment in lieu of notice (up to five weeks), and redundancy pay (up to four weeks per year of service). These payments are funded by the Commonwealth Government. This scheme is not available to employees who fall within the ‘excluded employees’ definition in s 556(2) of the Corporations Act. The payment of the advance may be paid to the employee directly or to the liquidator.“ If the payment is made to the liquidator, then s 560 of the Corporations Act will apply.“ This section provides that if a person has advanced money to a company for the purpose of payment of an employee's wages, unpaid leave or termination payment, then the person who has advanced the money has the same rights and priority in the winding up as a creditor of the company. In the context of the FEG scheme, this means that the Commonwealth has the same rights and priority as the employee would have had in respect of advances paid to the liquidator. After the priority debts listed in s 556(1) have been paid, and if there are still available funds, the claims of other unsecured creditors will be met in accordance with the pari passu principle in s 555. Often, the payments made under s 556 will leave nothing available for further distribution. After all of the creditors’ claims have been met, attention turns to debt claims by members.““* The claims of company members rank after those of creditors. In practice, this means that if a company is being wound up because of insolvency, it is unlikely that members will receive payment. The policy is reflected in s 563A, which provides, first, that claims against the company by members for debts owed to them in their capacity as members must be postponed until all other debts against the company are satisfied. An example of such a debt is a dividend that has been declared but not yet paid. The section applies, secondly, to‘any other claim that arises from buying, holding, selling or otherwise dealing in shares in the company’ This latter provision was added to s 563A in response to the 2007 decision of the High Court of Australia in Sons of Gwalia Ltd v Margaretic2 The Court's decision, and the subsequent legislative response, reveal some interesting points about statutory interpretation and the policies underlying insolvency legislation. Sons of Gwalia Ltd was a gold mining company listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (‘ASX’).152 On 18 August 2004, Mr Margaretic bought 20,000 fullypaid shares in Sons of Gwalia; 11 days later the company was placed in administration, leaving Margaretic (and other investors like him) with worthless shares. Margaretic argued that the company had failed to notify the ASX of its financial difficulties, as it was required to do under its continuous disclosure obligations, and that by making incorrect statements to the ASX the company engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct under statutory provisions including s 1041H of the Corporations Act 51 Accordingly, Margaretic claimed compensation for the difference between what was originally paid for the shares and their current value (which was zero). Margaretic’s argument was that he should be able to bring his claim as an unsecured creditor of the company, rather than as a member. At the time, s 563A did not make any reference to claims arising from ‘buying, holding, selling or otherwise dealing in shares’; the postponement (or’subordination’) effect of the section applied only to debts owed to a person in their capacity as a member. The question for the Court was whether Margaretic’s claim was for a debt owed to a member (in which case, the debt would be postponed to the claims of unsecured creditors), or in some other capacity. In a majority decision (Callinan J dissenting), the Court upheld Margaretic’s argument. In each of their judgments, Gleeson CJ and Hayne J held that the wording of statutory provisions governing misleading and deceptive conduct meant that they are is not available to employees who fall within the ‘excluded employees’ definition in s 556(2) of the Corporations Act. The payment of the advance may be paid to the employee directly or to the liquidator.“ If the payment is made to the liquidator, then s 560 of the Corporations Act will apply.“ This section provides that if a person has advanced money to a company for the purpose of payment of an employee's wages, unpaid leave or termination payment, then the person who has advanced the money has the same rights and priority in the winding up as a creditor of the company. In the context of the FEG scheme, this means that the Commonwealth has the same Sons of Gwalia Ltd was a gold mining company listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (‘ASX’).52 On 18 August 2004, Mr Margaretic bought 20,000 fullypaid shares in Sons of Gwalia; 11 days later the company was placed in administration, leaving Margaretic (and other investors like him) with worthless shares. Margaretic argued that the company had failed to notify the ASX of its financial difficulties, as it was required to do under its continuous disclosure obligations, and that by making incorrect statements to the ASX the company engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct under statutory provisions including s 1041H of the Corporations Act! Accordingly, Margaretic claimed compensation for the difference between what was originally paid for the shares and their current value (which was zero). Margaretic’s argument was that he should be able to bring his claim as an unsecured creditor of the company, rather than as a member. At the time, s 563A did not make any reference to claims arising from ‘buying, holding, selling or otherwise dealing in shares’; the postponement (or’subordination’) effect of the section applied only to debts owed to a person in their capacity as a member. The question for the Court was whether Margaretic’s claim was for a debt owed to a member (in which case, the debt would be postponed to the claims of unsecured creditors), or in some other capacity. available to any person who suffers loss in relation to the provision of financial services. Accordingly, Margaretic’s claim under those sections was not made in the capacity of a member, and s 563A (as it was then drafted)/=2 had no application. In the Court's opinion, the mere fact that Margaretic’s claim related to shareholding was not, on its own, sufficient to make this a claim in his capacity as a member. The effect of the Court's decision was to elevate certain claims that might be made by members to the same status as claims by unsecured creditors (but not those covered by s 556). Critics of the decision argued that this had the potential to add significant cost and delay to the insolvency process because of the nature of misrepresentation actions and the large number of shareholders that could be involved in such actions.1=2 Another concern was that it might be more difficult or expensive for companies to raise unsecured debt finance or to obtain credit from trade creditors.=4 Responding to these concerns, Parliament amended s 563A in 2010 to provide for the postponement of all claims in relation to buying, holding, selling or otherwise dealing in shares. This amendment reversed the effect of the decision in the Sons of Gwalia case. A court-ordered, or compulsory, winding up can come about in a number of ways: principally, via s 459A (winding up in insolvency), s 233 (winding up in response to finding of oppression, unfairly prejudicial or unfairly discriminatory conduct), and s 461. Section 459A is dealt with elsewhere in this present chapter (see Section 16.15.10); s 233 was dealt with in Chapter 14 (see Section 14.30.20). Here, we focus on compulsory winding up under s 461. Section 461(1) of the Corporations Act lists eight grounds on which a court may order the winding up of a company. Four of these grounds!*8 are considered in Chapter 14 (at Section 14.40) in the context of remedies available to members of a company, and that discussion is not repeated here. Of the remaining four grounds, two are relevant in the context of this present chapter: s 461(1)(a) special resolution by members, and s 461(1)(h) report by ASIC.152 We look at these in turn. Under s 461(1)(a), the court has discretion to order a winding up if the members have passed a special resolution that the company be wound up. A question arises concerning the relationship between this provision and s 491, which permits members, by special resolution, to resolve that a company be voluntarily wound up. The immediate point of difference is that s 491 does not require a court order for the special resolution to have effect; whereas, under s 461(1)(a), a court order is integral to the special resolution (it is, in effect, a resolution for a voluntary court-ordered winding up). In Hillig v Darkinjung Local Aboriginal Land Council, Barrett J considered the relationship between these two sections. His Honour noted that the exercise of the Court's discretion to make an order under s 461(1)(a) is not ruled out by the fact that the members had available to them the option of passing their spe- cial resolution under s 491: [T]he availability to the shareholders of the alternative of initiating voluntary winding up by special resolution does not represent any reason for declining to make a winding up order. This ... is really no more than an aspect of statutory interpretation: if there had been some intention that the voluntary winding up mechanism should have primacy, s 461(1)(a) would not form part of the Act458 Applications under s 461(1)(a) are rarely used.

Section 461(1)(h) relies upon ASIC’s powers of investigation in pt 3 of the ASIC Act, which permit ASIC to investigate and report on contraventions of the Corporations Act, among other things. If ASIC states, in such a report, that it is of the opinion that a company cannot pay its debts and should be wound up, or that it is in the interests of the public, the members or the creditors that the company be wound up, then the court has discretion to make that order. Section 464 also gives ASIC standing to apply, as if it were the company, for a winding up order where the Commission has been, or is, investigating the affairs of that company. The Corporations Act provides in pt 5.5 that a company can be wound up voluntarily. A key difference between a compulsory and a voluntary winding up is that the latter does not require an application to the court, nor a court order. Indeed, there is relatively little opportunity for court involvement in the voluntary winding up process. Unless the court grants leave, a voluntary winding up cannot take place if an application for a winding up on the grounds of insolvency has already been filed or the court has ordered that the company be wound up in insolvency (s 490). There are two forms of voluntary winding up: a members’ voluntary winding up, and a creditors’ voluntary winding up.

## 16.40.05 Members’ voluntary winding up

Amembers' voluntary winding up requires a special resolution to be passed by the company’s members (s 491). To address the risk that this mechanism could be abused by members seeking to jeopardise the interests of the company’s creditors, there is a further requirement: in order for a members’ voluntary winding up to proceed, a majority of the directors must make a declaration, based upon an inquiry into the company’s affairs, that the company will be able to pay its debts in full for up to 12 months after the winding up commences (s 494(1)). This declaration of solvency must be accompanied by a statement of affairs of the company that describes the company’s property, liabilities, and the estimated expenses of the winding up (s 494(2)). In the absence of this declaration, a voluntary winding up can only proceed as a creditors’ voluntary winding up. Put another way, a members’ voluntary winding up can only proceed if the company is solvent. Avoluntary winding up is deemed to commence on the day on which the special resolution is passed, unless the company was under administration, subject to a deed of company arrangement or a winding up of the company was already in progress (s 513B). When the special resolution is passed by the members, they must appoint a liquidator to wind up the affairs of the company and distribute the company’s property (s 495(1)). The other consequences of appointing a liquidator are described earlier in this chapter.

## 16.40.10 Creditors’ voluntary winding up

Where a voluntary winding up is being contemplated and the company is insolvent, it is the creditors’ financial interests that are at stake rather than those of the members. Accordingly, when a company is insolvent, the creditors are given effective control over the voluntary winding up process. A creditors’ voluntary winding up is the only means whereby an insolvent company can be voluntarily wound up. The creditors cannot commence a voluntary winding up themselves; instead, a voluntary winding up becomes a creditors’ voluntary winding up where the matter is removed from the control of the members because of the company’s insolvency. A creditors’ voluntary winding up can come about in one of three ways. The first situation occurs when the directors are not able to make the declaration that is required by s 494 regarding the company’s ability to pay its debts. In this situation, the company must then call a meeting of the company’s creditors, under s 499, to consider the appointment of a liquidator. The second situation arises when, after the commencement of a members’ voluntary winding up, the liquidator forms the view that, despite the directors’ declaration of solvency, the company is not able to pay its debts. In this situation, the liquidator must do one of three things (s 496(1)): (1) apply for a court-ordered winding up under s 459P (2) appoint an administrator under s 436B (3) convene a creditors’ meeting under s 499 which may then proceed with a creditors’ voluntary winding up. Third, it is possible for a creditors’ voluntary winding up to come about as a consequence of the company moving out of voluntary administration. This process is described in ss 446A and 446AA.

## 16.40.15 Simplified process for creditors’ voluntary winding up

There is a simplified process for a creditors’ voluntary winding up of a small business (s 500A). This process only applies if the total liabilities of the company do not exceed $1 million (reg 5.5.03). This piesa is available if the grees in acreditors’ voluntary mee up aI on reasonable grounds, that the company meets the say criteria’ do not exceed $1 million (reg 5.5.03). This process is available if the liquidator in a creditors’ voluntary winding up believes, on reasonable grounds, that the company meets the ‘eligibility criteria’ specified in s 500AA. Those criteria require, amongst other things, that ‘a triggering event’ has occurred within the previous twenty days (s 500A(2)(a)), that company will not be able to pay its debts in full within the 12 months after the triggering event, and that the company has not undergone a restructuring or been subject to a simplified liquidation process within the previous seven years (reg 5.5.03). Section 500AAA defines seven types of ‘triggering event’!52 The first is that the company’s members have passed a resolution in favour of voluntary winding up under s 491. The other six events arise in the context of a company moving out of a voluntary administration into a creditors’ voluntary winding up (as described in ss 446A, 446AA). The simplified process means that certain requirements relating to reporting to ASIC, meetings, committees of inspection, and the appointment of reviewing liquidators do not apply (s 500AE(2)). The liquidator must cease to follow the simplified process if the eligibility criteria are no longer met (s 500AC(1)) or the company or any of its directors has engaged in fraudulent or dishonest conduct that has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the interests of the creditors (reg 5.5.07). The process must also not be followed if at least 25 per cent in value of the creditors make such a request (s 500A(2)(a)).

## 16.40.20 Effect of a voluntary winding up

The commencement of a voluntary winding up has consequences for the company, shareholders, and employees. The effect on the company is that, from the passing of the special resolution, the company must cease to carry on its business except so far as is necessary to allow the liquidator to wind up that business. Necessarily, the company continues in existence as a corporate entity until it is deregistered (s 493). No action or other civil proceeding can be commenced or proceeded with against the company after the passing of the resolution (s 500(2)). The company’s property is to be used to discharge its liabilities equally, and thereafter to be distributed among the members according to their rights and remedies (s 501). Once the company’s affairs have been fully wound up the liquidator must prepare and present a report to a general meeting of the company (or to a meeting of creditors, in the case of a creditors’ voluntary winding up). That report shows how the winding up has been conducted and the company’s property has been disposed of. The report and accounts are then lodged with ASIC, which must deregister the company three months after lodgment (s 509). The consequence for shareholders of the winding up resolution is that there are restrictions on the capacity of members to transfer their shares and on alterations to the status of members (s 493A). In broad terms, consent of the liquidator will be required as a prerequisite to either a transfer of shares or alteration of status, noting that it is possible to appeal to the Court if the liquidator refuses to give consent. Surprisingly, as regards employees, there is no clear statement about whether the special resolution that commences a voluntary winding up operates to terminate the employment of the company’s employees. In McEvoy v Incat Tasmania Pty Ltd, Finkelstein J made the following observation: ‘The publication of a compulsory winding up order amounts to a dismissal of the company’s employees (Re General Rolling Stock Co (Ltd); Chapman’ case (1866) LR 1 Eq 346; In re Oriental Bank Corp; MacDowall’s case (1886) 32 ChD 366), though the contract of employment still remains on foot. The situation is probably different in a voluntary winding up. I say ‘probably different’ because the position is not settled and, in any event, there is no justification for any difference. Be that as it may, the preponderance of authority favours the view that a voluntary winding up does not disturb a contract with an employee: Midland Counties District Bank Ltd v Attwood [1905] 1 ChD 357; Re Matthew Brothers (In Liq) [1962] VR 262.18 O Loading. Please wait

## 16.45.05 Introduction

Acompany comes into existence when it is registered with ASIC. At the other end of its lifespan, a company may be deregistered. A company ceases to exist on deregistration.& In certain circumstances, a deregistered company may be reinstated. The deregistration and reinstatement of companies are regulated by ch 5A of the Corporations Act.

## 16.45.10 Deregistration of companies
Deregistration may occur in several ways. First, the company, a director, a member or a liquidator may make a voluntary application to ASIC for deregistration1®2 Such an application would only be granted where the stringent conditions in s 601AA(2) are satisfied. For example, the company must not be carrying on business, its assets must be worth less than $1,000; it must have no outstanding liabilities; and not be a party to any existing legal proceedings. Further, all members of the company must agree to the deregistration. After a period of two months’ notice of the proposed deregistration, ASIC may deregister the company. Second, the deregistration may be initiated by ASIC in circumstances where the company’s affairs have been fully wound up.1®? In these circumstances, ASIC is also required to give two months’ notice of the proposed deregistration following which ASIC may deregister the company. Finally, ASIC has an obligation to deregister the company in certain circumstances, including when:

+ the court has ordered ASIC to deregister the company following the completion of compulsory winding up
+ three months have elapsed since the liquidator lodged an’end of administration return’ in a voluntary winding up.
Importantly, as stated above, the company ceases to exist on deregistration.1® The trust property held by the company vests in the Commonwealth! and other property that was held by the company is vested in ASIC188

## 16.45.15 Reinstatement of companies

Clearly, deregistration may jeopardise the interests of those who have had dealings with the company and those who were involved in the management of the company. Chapter 5A therefore provides a mechanism whereby a deregistered company may be reinstated.1®2 The most common reason for reinstatement is to enable a deregistered company to be a party to litigation. This process has now been streamlined by s 601AG, which allows a person to recover from the insurer of the deregistered company an amount that was payable to the company under the insurance contract if the company had liability to the person and the insurance contract covered that liability immediately before deregistration. Under this provision, the person with a claim against the company—such as a tort claim for personal injuries—is entitled to recover from the deregistered company’s insurer directly and it is not necessary to reinstate the company to have access to the insurance. It has been held that s 601AG creates a statutory cause of action in favour of the claimant against the insurer-122 However, it may be necessary to reinstate the company if there is any uncertainty about the insurer's liability42+ ASIC may reinstate the company if it is satisfied that it should not have been deregistered.!2 In addition, the court may make an order that ASIC reinstate the registration of the company where an application has been made by a former liquidator or a person aggrieved by the deregistration.123 The court will make an order if it is satisfied that it is just that the company’s registration be reinstated.1 It is necessary for the court to consider the impact that restoration to the register would have on affected persons. One aspect of the inquiry into what is ‘just’ concerns the future stewardship of the reinstated company; for example, who will take up the roles of director and/or liquidator. Further, potential prejudice to former members must be considered where distributions have been made in the course of a winding up which may be recovered by the liquidator of the reinstated company126 The effect of reinstatement is that the company is taken to have continued in existence as if it had not been deregistered.Z Therefore, a person who is director of the company immediately before the deregistration becomes a director again and any property of the company that is vested in the Commonwealth or ASIC re-vests in the company./”8 If the company was in liquidation prior to deregistration it returns to that state172 Deregistration may occur in several ways.

First, the company, a director, a member or a liquidator may make a voluntary application to ASIC for deregistration1®2 Such an application would only be granted where the stringent conditions in s 601AA(2) are satisfied. For example, the company must not be carrying on business, its assets must be worth less than $1,000; it must have no outstanding liabilities; and not be a party to any existing legal proceedings. Further, all members of the company must agree to the deregistration. After a period of two months’ notice of the proposed deregistration, ASIC may deregister the company.

## 16.45.15 Reinstatement of companies

The effect of reinstatement is that the company is taken to have continued in existence as if it had not been deregistered.Z Therefore, a person who is director of the company immediately before the deregistration becomes a director again and any property of the company that is vested in the Commonwealth or The ease with which a company can be created contrasts with the complexity of bringing its legal existence to an end. Throughout this book we have seen that the company form can be adapted and utilised in many different ways. We have seen that during the life of a company many different interests can be affected—particularly shareholders and members, creditors (of different types), employees, directors and officers. Accordingly, it is not surprising that the process of bringing a company to the end of its legal existence is governed by detailed rules and processes that have the aim of ensuring that all interests are treated equitably and that all liabilities and responsibilities are discharged. 1 PL Davies, S Worthington and C Hare, Gower's Principles of Modern Company Law (Sweet & Maxwell, 11th ed, 2021) 1151. 2 See also R Langton and L Trotman, ‘Sharing the Proceeds of Business Failure—Competition between Feudal and Democratic Principles in Liquidation of Australian Companies’ (1999) 11 Corporate and Business Law Journal 263; H Anderson, The Theory and Reality in Insolvency Law: Some Contradictions in Australia’ (2009) 27(8) Company and Securities Law Journal 506. 3 Phoenix companies are discussed at Section 16.25.35. For a general discussion, see H Anderson, ‘Corporate Law and the Phoenix Company’ in R Tomasic (ed), Routledge Handbook of Corporate Law (Taylor & Francis, 2016); H Anderson et al, ‘Illegal Phoenix Activity: Is a Phoenix Prohibition the Solution? (2017) 35(3) Company and Securities Law Journal 184. 4 For example, where it is just and equitable to do so under s 461 (see the discussion at Section 14.40). 5 For example, an application for orders under s 233 regarding oppressive conduct under s 232 (see discussion at Section 14.30.20). § DJE Constructions Pty Ltd v Maddocks [1982] 1 NSWLR 5. Z This is discussed in Chapter 15 at Section 15.10.

8 For a critique of the statutory demand procedure, see C Anderson and C Brown, ‘Demanding a Change: Time to Act on Statutory Demands’ (2013) 212) Insolvency Law Journal a. 2 David Grant & Co Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation (1995) 184 CLR 265. 1° Ibid 270. 11 Corporations Act s 9 (‘statutory minimum’) and reg 5.4.01AAA. 12 Corporations Regulations 2001 (Cth) sch 2 form 509H.

13 Corporations Act s 459E(1). Defects in service may be raised under s 459G. 14 Corporations Act s 459E(3). 15 Spain v Union Steamship Co of New Zealand Ltd (1923) 32 CLR 138, 142 quoting W Blake Odgers, The Principles of Procedure Pleading and Practice in Civil Actions in the High Court of Justice (Stevens and Sons, Sth ed, 1903) 41. See also Vimblue Pty Ltd v Towel [2009] NSWSC 494. 18 Vimblue Pty Ltd v Toweel [2009] NSWSC 494 [16] (Barrett J). 12 Corporations Act s 459G. 18 Ibid s 459). 121 Australia Pty Ltd v LSI Consulting Pty Ltd (2007) 25 ACLC 1602 [54].

20 B & M Quality Constructions Pty Ltd v WG Brady Pty Ltd (1994) 116 FLR 218. At 218, the judge described the case as’an Alice in Wonderland Mad Hatter piece of litigation’ 21 Spencer Constructions Pty Ltd v G & M Aldridge Pty Ltd (1997) 76 FCR 452, 457-8. Overall, the courts are very strict about compliance with the form of the statutory demand (as per form 509H); however, a formal defect may not result in the statutory demand being declared invalid if no substantial injustice was caused. See the discussion of Dart J in SP Hay Pty Ltd v David Gray and Co Pty Ltd (2019) 133 ACSR 504 [19]-{26] regarding the failure of the creditor to nominate an address for service in the relevant state; see also Slap Corporation Pty Ltd v Civil, Infrastructure & Logistics Pty Ltd (2017) 50 VR 542. 22 F Assaf, Winding Up in Insolvency (LexisNexis, 3rd ed, 2021) [8.19]. 23 Delta Beta Pty Ltd v Everhard Vissers (1996) 20 ACSR 583. 24 MEC Import Sales Pty Ltd v lozzelli SRL (1998) 29 ACSR 229.

25 Thompson v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd [2024] QCA 73 [37] citing SGR Pastoral Pty Ltd v Christensen [2019] QSC 229. 26 Elm Financial Services Pty Ltd v MacDougall [2004] NSWSC 560. 22 Owners Corporation SP66609 v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd [2010] NSWSC 497.

28 Chippendale Printing Co Pty Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (1995) 55 FCR 562. 29 Note, however, that‘where a company raises a defence of solvency, against the background of the statutory presumption of insolvency having been enlivened, the company is required to adduce the “fullest and best” evidence of its financial position in order to discharge its onus’: AG Coombs Pty Ltd vM & V Consultants Pty Ltd (in liq) (2018) 55 VR 513, 539 [81] (Sloss J). 32 Corporations Act s 459S. 31 High Court Rules 2004 (Cth); Federal Court Rules 2011 (Cth); Court Procedures Rules 2006 (ACT); Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005 (NSW); Supreme Court Rules (NT); Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999 (Qld); Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006 (SA); Supreme Court Civil Supplementary Rules 2014 (SA); Supreme Court Rules 2000 (Tas); Supreme Court (General Civil YY) Loading. Please wait
