# Chapter 9 Corporate fundraising 9.05 Introduction 9.10 Raising share capital under ch 6D

## 9.10.05 Introduction

## 9.10.10 Terminology and context

## 9.10.15 When must a disclosure document be issued by a company seeking to raise share capital? 9.15 The basic framework of ch 6D

## 9.15.05 Which offers will require a disclosure document to be lodged with ASIC? 9.20 Ste} ‘Offer of securities’ 9.25 Step 2: Offers that do not need disclosure

## 9.25.05 Small-scale offerings

## 9.25.10 Personal offers

## 9.25.15 Twenty investors ceiling

## 9.25.20 Sophisticated investors

## 9.25.25 Offers made through an Australian Financial Services Licensee

## 9.25.30 Professional investors

## 9.25.35 Rights issues

## 9.25.40 Proving an exemption under pt 6D.2 9.35 Lodgement of a disclosure document

## 9.35.05 Exposure period 9.40 The content of a disclosure document

## 9.40.05 General disclosure requirements

## 9.40.10 Forecasts

## 9.40.15 Illustrations of s 710(2)

## 9.40.20 Snecific disclosure reauirements

There are three ways of becoming a shareholder: by subscribing to a new issue of shares in a company; by purchasing shares from an existing shareholder; or by transmission of ownership in shares due to the operation of law (for example, where shares are transferred to the beneficiary under a will). In this chapter, we focus on the first method: the issuing of shares and securities as a means of fundraising, commonly referred to as ‘raising capital’ or ‘equity raising. The term ‘subscription’ describes the relationship where a company issues shares directly to a shareholder. The legal relationship between the company that issues and the shareholder who subscribes for new shares can be analysed using the contractual rules of offer and acceptance. Acompany’s power to issue shares is provided by s 124(1)(a) of the Corporations Act. This power is usually exercised by the directors. The power to issue shares is subject to the fiduciary duties governing directors. Many of the significant cases on directors’ duties arise from the exercise of a power to issue shares. The corporate constitution can impose limitations on the issue of new shares. For example, the replaceable rule in s 254D requires that all unissued shares in a proprietary company should, before being issued, be offered to existing members pro rata according to their existing shareholdings. This is to ensure that the power of existing members is not diluted by a fresh issue of shares. However, our primary focus in this chapter is the issue of securities by public companies. Generally speaking, only public companies are permitted to raise capital by issuing securities to a broad cross-section of the public. This is regulated by ch 6D of the Corporations Act. C) Loading. Please wait

## 9.10.05 Introduction

Underpinning the regulation of companies is a significant policy that requires them to disclose certain types of information about their business and financial structure to the public. This disclosure enables investors and others who deal with the company to protect their interests and promotes the efficient allocation of resources on the basis of adequate and relevant information. This chapter addresses one of the key legislative expressions of that policy: the fundraising provisions in ch 6D of the Corporations Act The aim of the fundraising provisions is to ensure investors are provided with sufficient information via the publication of a prospectus or other disclosure document that enables them to make informed decisions regarding their initial investment in a company. Australian companies’ legislation inherited this philosophy of mandatory prospectus disclosure from the United Kingdom. The 1895 report of the Davey Committee in the United Kingdom! described the purpose and scope of this policy as follows: It may be a counsel of perfection and impossible of attainment to say that a prospectus shall disclose everything which could reasonably influence the mind of an investor of average prudence. But this ... is the ideal to be aimed at. ... [I]f people will not avail themselves of the means of information, or even use the information when given, it is not the law which is in fault. The arguments for and against mandatory disclosure by companies in the financial markets are discussed at Section 17.10.05. In relation to fundraising, two arguments are used to justify mandatory disclosure requirements. The ‘investor protection’ argument is that disclosure is necessary to protect investors from fraudulent corporate practices, and from making uninformed investment decisions. By contrast, the ‘investor confidence’ argument is that mandatory disclosure is necessary to ensure investors, particularly individual and unsophisticated investors, retain confidence in the financial markets. A drop in confidence can lead to ‘capital flight’ where investors find alternative investment options to those offered in financial markets. Putting these two claims together, mandatory disclosure has three benefits: It acts as a ‘disinfectant’ By requiring the publication of information, the legislation reduces the possibility that companies will deliberately set out to mislead investors. « Itaims to ensure that investment decisions are efficient. This aspiration is premised on the belief that, when given the necessary information, investors are more likely to direct their resources towards the most productive use. It aims to provide a level playing field by ensuring all investors begin from the same information base. Recently, it has been recognised that disclosure may be a necessary but not sufficient tool for investor protection, particularly for retail investors,2 and that disclosure of relevant information does not necessarily translate to good decision-making

## 9.10.10 Terminology and context

In general terms, ‘fundraising’ involves a company seeking capital by way of entering into a direct relationship with investors through offering them the opportunity to buy (subscribe for) the company’s securities. This is called a ‘primary offering of securities. The concept of ‘securities’ is broader than ‘shares, although shares fall within this definition. The definition of the word ‘securities’ for the purposes of ch 6D is discussed below at Section 9.20. ‘Securities’ will generally be used in preference to ‘shares’ for the remainder of this chapter. As stated above, generally speaking, only public companies are permitted to raise share capital under ch 6D. Proprietary companies? are prohibited from engaging in activity that may require disclosure to investors under ch 6D, except for an offer to existing shareholders or to employees of the company or its subsidiary or an equity crowdfunding (ECF) offer (s 113(3)). Equity crowdfunding is discussed below at Section 9.75ff. Proprietary companies must have no more than 50 non-employee shareholders (s 113(1)) and this often acts as an impediment to large-scale fundraising.1° Securities must not be offered in a body that A prospectus is the most common type of disclosure document that must be provided to investors prior to fundraising under ch 6D. However, ch 6D pt 6D.2 div 3 allows other types of disclosure documents to be prepared, which are discussed below at Section 9.30. For ease of reference, the term ‘disclosure document’ will be used throughout this section to describe a general disclosure document required by ch 6D; whereas a reference to ‘prospectus’ generally refers to the meaning of that word in the Corporations Act! How do people use disclosure documents? The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) conducted a study of the use of prospectuses in IPOs in 2017. The study found that institutional investors valued the prospectus because it was the main source of information on an IPO, and it is a regulated document which means that directors and others involved in the offer potentially have liability. These investors felt this liability added weight to the credibility and reliability of the document.4 Conversely, retail investors gleaned information from a variety of sources such as financial intermediaries (for example, brokers) and social media15 ASIC stated: In general, retail investors valued information that they perceived to be independent and easy to understand, and that had been prepared by someone they perceived as having a high level of expertise. ... The prospectus was seen as a key source of information, although many retail investors said the document was hard to read and could not be relied on to tell the whole truth about an IPO (given that it was perceived to be a marketing document). Previously, the test to determine if a disclosure document was required was whether the issue of securities was an offer to the public or to a section of the public. Now, there is a general prohibition on making an offer for securities unless it is accompanied by a relevant disclosure document. For example, in relation to IPOs, ch 6D states the rule in s 706: an offer of securities for issue needs disclosure to investors, with exemptions allowed in ss 708 and 708AA. Overview of the disclosure requirements in ch 6D The fundraising provisions in the Corporations Act are contained in ch 6D. The main features of these provisions are as follows: (1) Detailed regulation of the circumstances in which a disclosure document must be lodged with ASIC. Unless an offer for securities is excluded, a disclosure document must be lodged with ASIC (s 718(1)). This makes the document available to ASIC and the general public. ASIC will not pre-vet the document, but may use its power under s 739 to issue a stop order so that no securities are allotted or issued by the company. (2) Broadly worded, market-oriented standards governing the contents of a disclosure document. Previously, the provisions required a detailed list of matters for inclusion in a disclosure document. Now, there is a requirement under s 710 that the disclosure document (in this provision called a prospectus) contains all such information as investors and their professional advisers would reasonably require for the purpose of making an informed assessment of the particular investment offered. This is accompanied by an obligation to supplement the disclosure document with material developments occurring during its currency and by a more extensive liability regime applying to misstatements in, or omissions from, a disclosure document. (3) Abolition of pre-vetting of disclosure documents by ASIC, and an increased responsibility by those who frame the disclosure document. The model of regulation has changed from a paternalistic prior intervention by ASIC to a liability model, where the issuers of the disclosure document are criminally or civilly liable to the investor who suffers damage as a result of relying upon false information contained in the disclosure document. ©) Loading. Please wait The basic disclosure requirements are set out in ss 706 and 707. Section 706 is concerned with issue offers (primary trading). It states that disclosure to investors is required unless s 708 or 708AA says otherwise. There is a policy presumption in favour of formal disclosure for an issue of securities. Section 707 is concerned with sale offers: an offer of securities for sale by an existing holder (secondary trading). It states that disclosure is required in certain situations in ss 707(2), (3) or (5). Each of these situations applies unless s 708 says otherwise. This is a policy presumption against formal disclosure for a sale of securities.12 If an offer of securities needs disclosure to investors, s 709 states a prospectus must be prepared unless a different type of disclosure document—for example, an offer information statement—is permitted to be used (see s 709(4)). Section 721 imposes a requirement that the offer be made in or accompanied by a prospectus or other disclosure document as appropriate. Section 9 defines the term ‘disclosure document’ for an offer of securities to mean a prospectus, a profile statement, or an offer information statement. These terms are explained below. Each of these documents is required to be lodged with ASIC. As defined in s 9, a disclosure document does not qualify as a prospectus, profile statement or offer information statement unless it is lodged with ASIC. Section 727(1) states that a person must not make an offer of securities or distribute an application form for an offer of securities, that needs disclosure to investors, unless a disclosure document for the offer has been lodged with ASIC. In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v ActiveSuper Pty Ltd (in lig8 (‘ActiveSuper’), White J identified three elements necessary to establish a contravention of s 727: ..- first, the principal made, or distributed, an application form for an offer of securities, secondly, the offer needed disclosure to investors under Pt 6D.2 and, thirdly, a disclosure document for the offer had not been lodged with ASIC.12 In ActiveSuper, numerous Australian investors with relatively modest amounts of superannuation were induced to use their superannuation funds for investment in property in the United States and in companies incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. ‘Most of the invested moneys were not used for the purposes contemplated by the investors and were substantially, if not wholly, lost:22 The Court found that the offer engaged the requirements of ch 6D and the defendants had failed to give a disclosure document to the investors or lodge it with ASIC, resulting in a breach of ss 726 and 727. Significant consequences may flow when offers are made without lodging the requisite disclosure document. For example, the securities purchase may be voidable, the directors of the offeror may be disqualified, and the offerees may have a claim in damages.2+

## 9.15.05 Which offers will require a disclosure document to be lodged with ASIC?
The answer to the question of which offers need a disclosure document to be lodged with ASIC is found by going through a series of steps: (1) Analyse the term ‘offer of securities’ as used in ss 706, 721 and 727. (2) Decide whether the offer needs disclosure or is excluded under s 708. (3) Decide whether a prospectus must be prepared or a shorter document may be used; for example, a short-form prospectus, profile statement or offer information statement. We now address each of these steps in more detail. CX) Loading. Please wait Section 700 defines the word ‘securities: This section states that, in ch 6D, ‘security’ has the same meaning as it has in ch 7, so one must look to the definition in ss 92(4) and (5) which defines securities for ch 7 (except for paragraphs (e) and (f) of s 92(5)).22 The relevant provisions of s 92(5) are as follows: (a) a share in a body; or (b) a debenture of a body; or (c) a legal or equitable right or interest in a security covered by paragraph (a) or (b); or (d) an option to acquire, by way of issue, a security covered by paragraph (a) (b) or (c); or At the time of writing, the general definition of ‘offer a security’ in s 9 does not cover securities offered under ch 6D.”4 Therefore, general contract law on offers and invitations to treat applies with some adaptation.2> O Loading. Please wait To reiterate, s 706 states that an offer for securities for issue needs disclosure unless ss 708 or 708AA applies. Section 708AA is discussed below at Section

## 9.25.35. There are some offers for securities for sale that need disclosure, but at this stage the focus is on the issue of shares for subscription (primary issues),
therefore s 708 applies. The heading of s 708 states ‘Offers that do not need disclosure’

## 9.25.05 Small-scale offerings
This exemption is available under s 708(1) when three conditions are satisfied: « the offers are personal offers for issue or sale of a body's securities
* none of the offers result in a breach of the 20 investors ceiling * none of the offers result in a breach of the $2 million ceiling.

The rationale of this exemption is that it assists small-medium enterprises (SMEs) who wish to raise funds by issuing shares but do not have access to a broad base of public investors. The exemption was intended to cover SME fundraising by allowing SMEs access to a certain number of investors but not requiring them to bear the costs of preparing and publishing a disclosure document. The exemption is based on a policy assumption about the costs involved in producing a disclosure document relative to the small number of potential future investors who might take up the offer. To comprehend the scope of this exemption, three further concepts must be considered: personal offers, 20 investors ceiling, and sophisticated investors.

## 9.25.10 Personal offers A’personal offer’ is defined by s 708(2) as one that:

(a) may only be accepted by the person to whom it is made; and (b) is made to a person who is likely to be interested in the offer, having regard to: (i) previous contact between the person making the offer and that person; or (ii) some professional or other connection between the person making the offer and that person; or (iii) statements or actions by that person that indicate that they are interested in offers of that kind. The concept underlying sub-para (b) is that there must be some pre-existing basis for the offer to be made to the offeree. Then, it does not matter how many offers are made, as long as no more than 20 applications are accepted (and the $2 million ceiling is not breached).

## 9.25.15 Twenty investors ceiling

The 20 investors ceiling is breached if the offer results in securities in the body being issued to more than 20 people in any 12-month period (s 708(3)(a)) or if more than $2 million is raised from investors (s 708(3)(b)).2° Section 727 will be breached if a person who has relied on the small-scale offerings exemption offers to issue or transfer securities without disclosure to investors where the issue or transfer would result in a breach of the 20 investors ceiling or the $2 million ceiling (s 727(4)). It is also a breach to advertise an offer of securities which relies on the small-scale offerings exemption (s 734(1)).

## 9.25.20 Sophisticated investors

A sophisticated investor may be described as a person who is well-advised or informed and therefore does not need the information contained in the disclosure document as they are able to assess for themselves the benefit of the investment. The obligation to give disclosure to sophisticated investors is exempted in the following circumstances: (1) Section 708(8)(a): an offer of securities for issue or sale does not need disclosure if the minimum amount payable for the securities on acceptance of the offer is at least $500,000. (2) Section 708(8)(c): an offer of securities for issue or sale does not need disclosure if it ‘appears’ from a certificate, given by a qualified accountant no more Section 708(10) states that an offer of securities for issue or sale does not need disclosure where the offer is made through a financial services licensee. The licensee must be satisfied on reasonable grounds that the person to whom the offer is made has previous experience in investing in securities. The previous experience must allow the investor to assess the merits of the offer, the value of the securities, the risks of the investment, their own information needs and the adequacy of the information given by the person making the offer. The licensee is required to provide a written statement of their reasons for being satisfied as to those matters before or at the time when the offer is made. The written statement must be directed to the investor. The person making the offer will need to obtain and rely on it to be sure the exemption is available. It is not clear whether a written statement applying to securities generally, or to a class of securities, would satisfy the requirement for the exemption. However, the statement addresses the investor's experience—rather than anything particular to the offer—so a general statement may suffice. The investor must sign a written acknowledgement before or at the time when the offer is made, stating that the licensee has not given them a disclosure document in relation to the offer (s 708(10)(d)). In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Maxwell2Z Brereton J held that the licensee's satisfaction on reasonable grounds of the matters in the exemption is a condition of the availability of the exemption and requires the licensee to significantly investigate the experience of the investor to form the relevant opinion. Similarly, Barrett J in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Elm Financial Services Pty Ltd28 commented that proof of the matters stated in s 708(10)(b) must be approached diligently and carefully. His Honour stated that the ‘licensee has a statutory duty to make inquiry about all matters relevant to the opinion it must form and then, of course, consider whether, in the factual circumstances, there exist the reasonable grounds for it to be satisfied as to the matters stated’22 His Honour found that the ‘most cursory attention to the statutory criteria would have made it immediately clear [to the licensee in that case] that there were no reasonable grounds for forming the relevant opinions about the relevant investors’22

## 9.25.30 Professional investors

An offer of securities does not need disclosure to investors if it is made to a ‘professional investor’ (s 708(11)(a)), or a person who has or controls gross assets of at least $10 million (s 708(11)(b)). The term ‘professional investor’ is defined in s 9 to cover investors such as financial services licensees, institutional investors regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority, trustees of a superannuation fund or an approved deposit fund with net assets of at least $10 million, listed entities and their related companies, and exempt public authorities. This contemplates an investor with a high level of expertise or assets. In MIS Funding No 1 Pty Ltd v Buckley," Elliott J held that ‘control’ as used in the definition of ‘professional investor’ meant that if a person held and controlled the majority of shares in a company, and commensurate voting rights, that person would be considered to be in control of a company and its assets. Finally, note that the $10 million figure in s 708(11)(b) refers to gross rather than net assets.

## 9.25.35 Rights issues

Companies can raise funds from existing shareholders by undertaking a rights issue. The term ‘rights issue’ is defined in s 9A as an offer of securities where the offer is made to existing shareholders in the same percentage as the securities they hold; that is, the offer is made in the same proportion to their existing shareholdings. The terms of the offer made to each shareholder must be identical (s 9A(1)(c)). Pursuant to s 708AA, disclosure to investors is not required for a rights issue of quoted securities—for example, on the ASX—if certain conditions are met. To qualify for this exemption from the disclosure requirements, a listed company must give the market operator, such as the ASX, a notice (‘a cleansing notice’) that includes the following statements:

* the company has complied with its financial reporting obligations under ch 2M? and its continuous disclosure obligations under ss 674 and 674A22
+ the potential effect the issue of shares will have on the control of the company and the consequences of that effect (s 708AA(7))24
## 9.25.40 Proving an exemption under pt 6D.2
An offeror bears the onus of establishing that one or other of the exemptions in pt 6D.2 of the Corporations Act is applicable in a particular case25 For an example of the application of the exemptions in s 708 to particular facts (albeit unsuccessful), see Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Astra Resources plc3® the adequacy of the information given by the person making the offer. The licensee is required to provide a written statement of their reasons for being satisfied as to those matters before or at the time when the offer is made.

## 9.25.30 Professional investors

## 9.25.35 Rights issues O Loading. Please wait

Section 705 contains a useful table which clearly sets out the requirements of this step. The types of disclosure documents can be classified into three categories: (1) Prospectus and short-form prospectus: a prospectus is the standard full-disclosure document. A short-form prospectus can save costs: if the issuer has lodged information with ASIC for other reasons (for example, annual reporting requirements), it may issue a shorter prospectus that refers to that other material. This is referred to as ‘incorporation by reference’ (ss 709(1), 712). (2) Profile statement: with approval by ASIC, certain types of securities may be offered via a profile statement. This is prepared in addition to a prospectus and contains basic information. Anyone who is given a profile statement must be given a copy of the full prospectus free of charge, if requested (ss 709(2), 721(3)). (3) Offer information statement: if the amount to be raised via the issue of securities is $10 million or less, an offer information statement may be used instead of a full prospectus. This document has fewer disclosure requirements than a prospectus and must contain a warning to that effect (ss 709(4), 715). Cc) Loading. Please wait Section 718 requires that a disclosure document, duly signed and with all appropriate consents (ss 351, 720), must be lodged with ASIC if it is to be used for an offer of securities. The consents needed for a primary offer of securities include the consent of each director of the company (s 720).

## 9.35.05 Exposure period

Section 727(3) prohibits a person from accepting an application for non-quoted securities offered under a disclosure document or issuing or transferring those securities until seven days after lodgement of the disclosure document. This seven-day period is referred to as the ‘exposure period’ ASIC may extend the exposure period for a further seven days. The 7- to 14-day period gives ASIC and the market an opportunity to consider the disclosure document before the commencement of fundraising, so that if disclosure is defective the market can draw the defect to ASIC's attention or the aggrieved parties can seek injunctions to prevent the fundraising22 During this period, ASIC may examine the disclosure document to determine if disclosure is inadequate or if false or misleading statements have been made. ASIC states that: ‘The primary objectives of the post-lodgement review program are to ensure adequate protection for investors and maintain investor confidence. In reviewing, we are only concerned with disclosure deficiencies and contraventions of the Corporations Act. Our review of the document does not consider whether the securities offered are desirable investments.*8 If ASIC becomes aware of a problem, it may use its stop order power under s 739 to prevent the company from issuing the securities22 The stop order power may be exercised where the document is not worded and presented in a clear, concise and effective manner (s 715A) or if the offer contravenes s 728 (s 739(1A)).42 The stop order power in s 739 allows ASIC to make an order that no offers, issues, sales or transfers of securities be made while the order is in force or to restrain conduct that breaches s 734; for example, prohibited advertising (s 739(1A)). Under s 739(2), ASIC must hold a hearing and give a reasonable opportunity to any interested person to make oral or written submissions on whether an order should be made. However, if ASIC considers that any delay in making an order under s 739(1A) would be prejudicial to the public interest, ASIC may make an interim order (s 739(3)). The interim order may be made without holding a hearing and can last for up to 21 days. The stop order power in s 739 was considered in Thompson v Australian Securities and Investments Commission." In that case, the applicant, WAC Pty Ltd (‘WAC’), was a commercial radio station. WAC agreed to sell its issued share capital to IMM Ltd. The WAC sale was conditional upon IMM raising $6.5 million through the issue of ordinary shares. On 1 March 2002, IMM prepared a prospectus and lodged it with ASIC. On 2 April 2002, IMM advised the market that the share offer had been oversubscribed and the directors had resolved to close the offer. ASIC subsequently advised the IMM directors that it believed a third party had a prior claim to a broadcasting licence used by WAC. The IMM directors investigated but disagreed and notified ASIC accordingly. On 8 April 2002, ASIC issued an interim order under s 739(3) that no offers, issues, sales or transfers of securities be made in relation to the IMM offer. On 16 April 2002, WAC applied for a review of ASIC's decision to make the interim order, claiming that WAC would suffer a financial detriment if the sale agreement could not be completed. The applicants argued that ASIC had no power to make the order because, at the date of the order, IMM had ceased offering securities. Branson J found that ASIC had the power to issue the interim order at the relevant time and therefore dismissed WAC’s application. Her Honour stated as follows: In considering the proper interpretation of s 739, it is appropriate to start from the premise that the section is a provision designed for the protection of potential investors. ... [I]ts inclusion in the Act reflects an appreciation by the legislature that s 724 may provide ineffective protection to an applicant for securities where the relevant disclosure document contains a material misstatement or omission. It would therefore seem logical for the ambit of s 739 to be at least co-extensive with that of s 724. Further, ... the terms of s 739(1) indicate that the power given by s 739 to ASIC in respect of an offer of securities under a disclosure statement lodged with it is not intended to come to an end until it becomes impossible for any stop order made by ASIC to operate according to its terms. That is, until it is no longer possible for any relevant offers, issues, sales or transfers of the relevant securities to be made. ... It would not ... promote the purpose underlying the Act to adopt a construction of s 739 which left what could be a critical aspect of a fundraising process (that is, the issue of securities after the close of the offer) beyond the power of ASIC to issue a stop order. Nor ... would it promote the purpose underlying the Act if s 739 were construed OC) Loading. Please wait the methodology adopted when making a forecast in a disclosure document, particularly if there is disagreement about the appropriate methodology adopted by the offeror22 The broad interpretive scope of the s 710 requirement is narrowed in three ways. First, the first sentence in s 710(1) requiring ‘all the information that investors and their professional advisers would reasonably require’ is qualified by the second sentence (in sub-s (1)(a)) so it applies only to the extent it is reasonable for investors and their professional advisers to expect to find that information in the prospectus. Second, in s 710(1)(b), the prospectus shall contain this information only if a person whose knowledge is relevant: (i) actually knows the information; or (ii) in the circumstances ought reasonably to have obtained the information by making enquiries. Section 710(3) lists the people whose knowledge is relevant, for example: the issuing company a director or proposed director of the issuer an underwriter or financial services licensee to the issue a person named in the prospectus as having made a statement included in the statement or upon which the prospectus is based a person named in the prospectus as having performed a particular professional or advisory function. In Australian Securities Commission v MacLeod,*! an expert geologist, Mr MacLeod, made statements about the potential profitability of a company based on the samples of diamonds taken during exploration. It was held that the statement was misleading because the sample was not of sufficient size from which it could be assessed whether the diamonds were present in commercial quantities.*2 Section 710(3)(f) may apply to such statements and it may be relevant to establish the liability of experts such as MacLeod for misstatements, possibly as an alternative to other persons who may be liable under that provision. Section 710(3) is an important provision because it creates a linkage between the general obligation to give proper disclosure under s 710 and liability for misstatements and omissions in ss 728 and 729. These provisions are discussed below. Section 710(3) states the ambit of liability (the relevant knowledge) and who is potentially liable for defects in the prospectus. Third, s 710(2) explains the factors to be considered in determining what information to include in a prospectus, including:

+ the nature of securities
* the nature of the issuing body * the matters that likely investors may reasonably be expected to know
* the fact that certain matters may reasonably be expected to be known to their professional advisers.

Section 710(2) requires the issuer to consider the audience to whom the offer is directed and the context of the offering. For example, the audience for shares in a demutualised company that was formerly a government-owned enterprise will be different to the audience of a start-up company for experimental technology.

## 9.40.15 Illustrations of s 710(2)
‘The nature of the securities’ Section 710(2) explains the method of determining what information to include in a prospectus. Section 710(2)(a) states that the nature of the securities and of the body providing the securities should be considered. Here, we provide an example of how ‘the nature of the securities’ can affect the level of disclosure. Consider the distinction between prospectuses where the securities are offered as part of an IPO, and where the securities are part of a class of securities already listed ona licensed financial market and have been quoted for 12 months. The latter are called ‘transaction specific’ prospectuses. These could be more antly descrihed as ‘continuaus disclosure’ nrasnectuses hecause the offeror is subiect to a riaaraus reaime involvina continuaus and neriodic disclosure The Section 710(2) explains the method of determining what information to include in a prospectus. Section 710(2)(a) states that the nature of the securities and of the body providing the securities should be considered. Here, we provide an example of how ‘the nature of the securities’ can affect the level of disclosure. Consider the distinction between prospectuses where the securities are offered as part of an IPO, and where the securities are part of a class of securities already listed ona licensed financial market and have been quoted for 12 months. The latter are called ‘transaction specific’ prospectuses. These could be more aptly described as ‘continuous disclosure’ prospectuses because the offeror is subject to a rigorous regime involving continuous and periodic disclosure. The disclosure regime for listed companies is discussed in Chapter 17. The following explains the way in which this difference affects the level of disclosure ina prospectus: An IPO prospectus must fully introduce the company to the market and inevitably becomes a ‘cornerstone’ document from which subsequent reports (eg annual reports, continuous disclosure requirements etc.) build a progressive updating of the original statement. “Transaction Specific’ prospectuses deal with companies that are already known to the market and accordingly do not have to duplicate background and financial information already previously disclosed.53 Continuous disclosure prospectuses are governed by s 713. This provision will be discussed below. At this point, it should be noted that the differing nature of the securities involved gives rise to differing disclosure levels. Section 710(2)(c) lists ‘the matters that likely investors may reasonably be expected to know‘ This section asks the issuer to have regard to the kinds of persons likely to consider subscribing for the securities. This intended audience will affect the level and nature of the disclosure required in a prospectus. An example of considering the intended audience is in Fraser v NRMA Holdings Ltd.“ In that case, NRMA at the time of the proceedings consisted of three entities: (1) NRMA Ltd (‘the Association’): a company limited by guarantee formed to promote the interests of motorists and road users and to provide an emergency breakdown service (2) NRMA Insurance Ltd (‘the Insurance Company’): a company limited by guarantee and carrying on a successful insurance and financial services business (3) NRMA Holdings Ltd (‘Holdings’): a public company limited by shares and incorporated under the Corporations Act. Holdings was established by the boards of both the Association and the Insurance Company as part of an overall plan to demutualise those two entities. The plan was to turn both entities into companies limited by shares, with the object of making profits and distributing them to shareholders. In exchange for giving up their interest in the companies, members of the Association and the Insurance Company would be issued with shares in Holdings or cash. Holdings issued a prospectus to members of both the Association and the Insurance Company. Two dissident directors of the Association brought proceedings in the Federal Court for a declaration that the prospectus was misleading and deceptive and contravened s 52 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) (now s 18 of the Australian Consumer Law).3 For various reasons, s 710 did not apply. However, the case illustrates who constitutes the audience or likely investors in Holdings for the purposes of s 710 and a factual application of the misleading and deceptive test in s 728. On appeal, the Full Federal Court (Black CJ, von Doussa and Cooper JJ) held that the prospectus was false or misleading and granted the orders sought. The prospectus characterised the shares that the members of both the Association and the Insurance Company would receive as part of the demutualisation process as ‘free shares’ The Full Court held that that expression, appearing as often as it did in the prospectus (230 times), would reasonably be expected to On appeal, the Full Federal Court (Black CJ, von Doussa and Cooper JJ) held that the prospectus was false or misleading and granted the orders sought. The prospectus characterised the shares that the members of both the Association and the Insurance Company would receive as part of the demutualisation process as ‘free shares’ The Full Court held that that expression, appearing as often as it did in the prospectus (230 times), would reasonably be expected to lead a reader to assume that such shares could be acquired without outlay, or without significant outlay. The clear impression was that members of the Association or the Insurance Company would not have to give up anything to acquire those shares. In fact, the members of the Association and the Insurance Company would have to give up their rights as members of those companies. Those rights were capable of being significant rights. For example, the demutualisation could mean the removal of the road services for Association members and removal of the insurance rebate for members of the Insurance Company. The characterisation of the shares in Holdings as free shares was therefore misleading and deceptive. The audience was described by the Full Court as follows: [T]he membership of the Association to whom the prospectus ... [was] addressed comprised some 1.8 million people, a large proportion of the adult population of NSW and the ACT. The common bond between them is that they are motorists. It is difficult to envisage a wider cross section of the community and in determining the alleged effect of conduct that is alleged to be misleading or deceptive it is of course relevant to consider the class of persons likely to be exposed to that conduct. As the learned trial judge observed, the addressees of the prospectus may be expected to include significant numbers of people who, whilst quite astute in dealing with their day-to-day financial affairs, have no experience in dealing with shares, with corporate reorganisation, or with a prospectus. Moreover, ‘demutualisation’ is an unusual form of corporate reorganisation, even to many experienced investors. Another useful application of s 710 is in Exeter Group Ltd v Australian Securities Commission =2 This case was an appeal to the former Administrative Appeals Tribunal®8 (AAT) from a refusal of ASIC to register a prospectus because it did not comply with the disclosure requirements under the predecessor to s 710. This case involved an invitation to subscribe for up to a total of 10 million shares of 20 cents each fully paid in the capital of the company. The prospectus stated that an objective of the company was to offer an opportunity to investors of small amounts ($2,000 each) to‘get in on the ground floor’=? of emerging businesses. The company was an unlisted public company formed for the purpose of raising funds from at least 300 members of the public under the prospectus. At the time of lodging the prospectus, the company had an issued capital of $1 consisting of five shares held by a private company (the manager) and its nominees. The company had not traded or carried on business prior to the date of the prospectus. The reason for the share issue was to fund the company so it could search for a takeover target. No target had been identified, nor had any inquiries been made in the 12 months leading up to the court hearing. The prospectus made the following statement: ‘The shares offered by this prospectus are considered to be speculative in nature’®2 The reason for the share issue was to fund the company so it could search for a takeover target. No target had been identified, nor had any inquiries been made in the 12 months leading up to the court hearing. The prospectus made the following statement: ‘The shares offered by this prospectus are considered to be speculative in nature’ However, almost nothing of a factual nature was disclosed in the prospectus. The company argued that it knew nothing about its future investments and was not obliged to disclose anything. In interpreting s 710, the AAT stated that: ‘The material to be included must fulfil the reasonable expectation of the investor—that is to say an expectation based on reason or a process of ratiocination [thinking or reasoning logically] —and must be such as will enable a proposed investor to make an informed assessment of the matters set out in the subsection. An informed assessment is one based upon awareness, alertness, enlightenment and knowledge rather than upon presentiments, intuition, feelings or blind chance ... Therefore the subsection compelled the disclosure of sufficient basic facts to allow these rational assessments to take place. In this case, the company had not complied with s 710 because there was no basis upon which any intending investor could make a rational assessment of the prospects of the company.

## 9.40.20 Specific disclosure requirements

The Corporations Act requires a prospectus to contain a number of specific disclosures. These disclosures are clearly stated in s 711. These disclosures are only relevant to prospectuses. The Corporations Act also makes provision for the content of short-form prospectuses (s 712), profile statements (s 714) and information statements (s 715). Disclosure of interests: ss 711(2) and (3) The prospectus must set out the amount that any person (as listed in s 711(4)) has been paid in the last two years or will be paid and any benefits which will be given to directors or prospective directors or promoters. The final sentence in s 711(3) should be noted: ’... it is not sufficient merely to state in the prospectus that a person has been paid or will be paid normal, usual or standard fees'—the specific amount must be stipulated. Disclosure of persons: s 711(4) The prospectus must identify individuals by name in relation to the disclosure of interests in ss 711(2) and (3); that is, the prospectus must include the identities of directors, professional advisers, stockbrokers, underwriters and promoters. feelings or blind chance ... Therefore the subsection compelled the disclosure of sufficient basic facts to allow these rational assessments to take place:

## 9.40.20 Specific disclosure requirements Disclosure of interests: ss 711(2) and (3) Quotation of securities: s 711(5)

If the prospectus implies or states that the securities are to be quoted on a licensed financial market, then the prospectus must state details of the application for admission to the financial market, including details of an application for admission that is yet to be made. Expiry date: s 711(6) The prospectus must nominate an expiry date beyond which no securities may be issued. This expiry date must be no later than 13 months after the date of the prospectus.

## 9.40.25 Content of disclosure documents for listed securities

The disclosure requirements for an offer of listed securities are less onerous than those relating to unlisted securities. A prospectus for an offer of continuously quoted securities is required to contain information about the transaction and other material information that is not available to the market. The rationale is that all material information concerning the activities and financial standing of the entity should have been provided to the market under the continuous and periodic disclosure regimes. Potential investors will have access to that information. The continuous and periodic disclosure regimes are explained in Chapter 17. Section 713 sets out an alternative general disclosure test which requires a lower level of disclosure but is deemed to satisfy s 710 if all the elements are satisfied. Section 713(2) provides that a continuous disclosure prospectus must contain ‘all the information investors and their professional advisers would reasonably require to make an informed assessment of’:

+ the effect of the offer on the body; and
* the rights and liabilities attaching to the securities offered; and
+ if options are involved—the rights and liabilities attached to the options and underlying securities.
Therefore, this section applies the same ‘informed investor’ test with respect to a narrower range of matters. ASIC has the power to exclude a company that has securities quoted on an exchange from issuing a prospectus with reduced content where ASIC believes the company failed to comply with its continuous disclosure obligations. These obligations are discussed in Chapter 17. The Corporations Act requires a prospectus to contain a number ot specinc disclosures. Ihese disclosures are clearly stated in s 711. [hese disclosures are only relevant to prospectuses. The Corporations Act also makes provision for the content of short-form prospectuses (s 712), profile statements (s 714) and information statements (s 715). Disclosure of interests: ss 711(2) and (3) The prospectus must set out the amount that any person (as listed in s 711(4)) has been paid in the last two years or will be paid and any benefits which will be given to directors or prospective directors or promoters. The final sentence in s 711(3) should be noted: ’... it is not sufficient merely to state in the prospectus that a person has been paid or will be paid normal, usual or standard fees'—the specific amount must be stipulated. Disclosure of persons: s 711(4) Quotation of securities: s 711(5) Expiry date: s 711(6)

## 9.40.25 Content of disclosure documents for listed secur’ @) Loading. Please wait

Prospectuses have a maximum life of 13 months after issue (s 711(6)). During this time, the information in the prospectus may need updating or correction; for example, because of concerns raised by ASIC or new developments in the issuing company.
## 9.45.05 Supplementary and replacement disclosure documents

Under s 719(1), the duty to issue a supplementary or replacement disclosure document is triggered when the person making the offer becomes aware of any of the following which is materially adverse to an investor: (a) a misleading or deceptive statement in the disclosure document; or (b) an omission from the disclosure document of information required by [the statutory content rules] (©) anew circumstance that: (i) has arisen since the disclosure document was lodged; and (ii) would have been required [by the statutory content rules] to be included in the disclosure document if it had arisen before the disclosure document was lodged. Those individuals liable for a disclosure document under s 729 have a duty to inform the person making the offer about deficiencies in the disclosure document (s 730). Continuation of the offer where these matters have arisen is prohibited under s 728(1). Supplementary disclosure documents are used to ensure that the document retains continuing compliance with ch 6D throughout its life (s 719(2)). Replacement disclosure documents stand in substitution of the original disclosure document (s 719(3)). In these circumstances, the offeror is under an obligation to repay the money received under the offer or to make further disclosure and allow the offeree the opportunity to withdraw from the offer (s 724). The documents required to be given by way of further disclosure are set out in a table in s 724(3). If the offeror issues securities in breach of s 724, the offeree may return the securities and have their money repaid (s 737). @) Loading. Please wait The purpose of the disclosure document provisions in the Corporations Act is to ensure that investors have access to all important information about a securities offer before they make an investment decision. The achievement of that aim could be compromised by promotional campaigns which rely on selective publicity rather than a balanced presentation of facts. The Corporations Act contains prohibitions on advertising (subject to exceptions) that are designed to protect inexperienced investors from the subtle powers of advertising and public comment and to ensure that investment decisions are made on the basis of a prospectus. The key prohibition is in s 734(2), which states that if an offer or intended offer of securities needs a disclosure document, a person must not ‘advertise the offer ... or publish a statement that directly or indirectly refers to the offer or intended offer, or is reasonably likely to induce people to apply for the securities: Section 734(2A) states that advertising or publication may be authorised by other subsections. For example, s 734(6) allows ‘tombstone’ advertising, and s 734(7) allows certain notices and news reports. Section 734 applies different standards to the advertising of quoted and unquoted securities

## 9.50.05 Image advertising: s 734(3)

Image advertising praises the nature or value of a prospective issuer without expressly referring to its impending public offer. Before a company produces a disclosure document, it might run an awareness campaign that pitches the company to the public. This could breach s 734(2) because it might indirectly refer to the offer or induce people to apply for securities. In deciding whether a statement indirectly refers to an offer or is reasonably likely to induce applications, regard must be had to whether the statement forms part of normal product advertising that is genuinely directed to maintaining or attracting customers for the company’s products, whether the statement communicates information which materially deals with the affairs of the company, and whether the statement is likely to encourage investment decisions being made on the basis of the statement, rather than the disclosure document (s 734(3)).

## 9.50.10 Pathfinders: s 734(9)

A pathfinder is a draft disclosure document designed to assist the company to consult with the market before setting a price for a proposed issue or sale of securities. It is permitted under s 734(9). The company sends the draft to underwriters, brokers and other sophisticated investors to enable it to set a price for the securities to be issued or to finalise the content of a disclosure document. The recipient of the pathfinder must be a ‘sophisticated investor’ (ss 708(8), 708(10)) or a ‘professional investor’ (s 708(11)). C) Loading. Please wait

## 9.55.05 General liability

There are several provisions that impose liability where the fundraising activity breaches a requirement of ch 6D. Section 726 prohibits the offering of securities in a body that does not exist. Section 727 prohibits making offers without a current disclosure document; that is, without lodging a disclosure statement; making offers which are not included in or accompanied by a disclosure document; accepting applications within the ‘exposure period’; and issuing securities that breach the 20 investors ceiling or $2 million ceiling. Section 728(1) states, in summary, that a person must not offer securities under a disclosure statement if there is: (a) a misleading or deceptive statement in the disclosure document, application form or offer document (b) an omission from the disclosure document of material required by various sections (including the content requirements of s 710) (c) a new circumstance that has arisen since the disclosure document was lodged, and would have been required by various sections (including s 710) to be included in the disclosure document if it had arisen before lodgement.

## 9.55.10 Criminal and civil penalty liability

Where a person makes a misleading or deceptive statement or there is omission or new circumstance that has not been disclosed (thereby contravening s 728(1)), and that contravention is materially adverse from the point of view of an investor, the person will commit an offence (s 728(3))—that is, they will be criminally liable—and exposed to a civil penalty under s 728(4).©

## 9.55.15 Civil liability to pay compensation

In addition to any other consequences that might flow from the Corporations Act® and the general law,®8 a contravention of s 728(1) may lead to liability to compensate investors under s 729. To recover under s 729, investors must prove that:

* they suffered loss or damage
* the loss or damage was ‘because’ of a contravention of s 728(1)
+ the defendant is a person referred to in the table to s 729(1), regardless of whether the defendant committed or was involved in the contravention
* the loss or damage claimed is a loss or damage for which the table makes the defendant liable.

The table in s 729 establishes a form of strict civil liability, regardless of the degree of involvement (but subject to defences) for the person making the offer, its directors, the proposed directors of the body whose securities are being offered, and the underwriter to the issue. These people are liable for loss or damage caused by any contravention of s 728(1). In contrast, the expert who consents to the inclusion of a statement in the disclosure document is liable only if the loss or damage is caused by that statement, and others such as professional advisers are liable only if they are involved in the contravention. Note that the fundraising activity contemplated by s 728 is excluded from other provisions of the Corporations Act and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (Cth) (‘ASIC Act’) which create wide-ranging liability for misleading and deceptive conduct in relation to financial products or financial services (Corporations Act s 1041H(3)) or a financial service only (ASIC Act s 12DA(1A)). @) Loading. Please wait Certain people can rely on the defences set out in ss 731-3 to absolve them from liability for a contravention of the disclosure requirements in ch 6D.

## 9.60.05 Dued

To establish the due diligence defence in s 731, the defendant must prove that they ‘made all inquiries (if any) that were reasonable in the circumstances and that after doing so, believed on reasonable grounds that there was no misleading or deceptive statement’ or no omission, as the case may be. On its wording, the due diligence defence is available to the person who makes the offer. In the case of an offer to issue securities, that person is the issuing body; that is, the company that offers its shares. The company will rely on the implementation of a due diligence and prospectus verification program for the purpose of proving it made all reasonable inquiries were in the circumstances, even though a mistake may have occurred. To act ‘diligently’ is to be attentive to one’s task or duties. The term is derived from s 11(b)(3) of the United States’ Securities Act 1933 which provides a defence of due diligence to those who have made reasonable investigations into matters contained in a prospectus. The standard of care is specified in the US legislation under s 11(c) which states that the standard is ‘that required of a prudent man [sic] in the management of his own property’ It is now standard practice for issuing companies to form a due diligence committee to supervise the preparation of the disclosure document, to identify all necessary information that must be disclosed, and to verify that information. A disclosure document committee usually consists of those who have knowledge of the content under s 710 or who may be liable under s 729 of the Corporations Act. The committee must be properly established and instructed by the board to enable the issuing company and its directors to take advantage of the defence in s 731.

## 9.60.10 Lack of knowledge

The due diligence defence under s 731 applies to prospectuses only. Section 732 sets out a ‘lack of knowledge’ defence where the disclosure defect relates to an offer information statement or a profile statement.

## 9.60.15 Reasonable reliance

The ‘reasonable reliance’ defence is in s 733(1). The defendant must prove that they placed reasonable reliance on information given to them by: (a) if the defendant is a body—someone other than a director, employee or agent of the body (b) if the defendant is an individual—someone other than an employee or agent of the individual. A person is not an agent of a body or individual merely because that person performs a particular professional or advisory function for the body or individual (s 733(2)). In the typical process adopted for the preparation of a prospectus for an IPO, the directors and officers of the company (who are not members of the due diligence and prospectus verification committees), and experts and advisers (who, again, are not members of those committees) will seek to rely on the work of those committees and their reports to the board. Additionally, each member of the committees will seek to rely on the separate work of other members of the committees. The issuing company may also take advantage of the same ‘reasonable reliance’ argument, but it will need to ensure the proper establishment and conduct of the due diligence process because of the narrow parameters of the reasonable reliance test. Persons seeking to rely on the defence need to ensure that the due diligence and verification processes are structured in accordance with best practice in order to argue that their reliance on others was reasonable.

## 9.60.20 Withdrawal of consent defence

A person named in a disclosure statement as a proposed director or underwriter or as the maker of a statement in the disclosure document has a defence if that person can show that they publicly withdrew consent to being named (s 733(3)).22 O Loading. Please wait ASIC may exercise discretion to exempt persons from compliance with the requirements of ch 6D of the Corporations Act. In some circumstances, it will be possible to seek relief from the obligation to prepare and lodge a disclosure document pursuant to s 741. Section 741 gives ASIC the power to exempt persons, individually or collectively, from the operation of ch 6D. The section also gives ASIC the power to modify the terms of ch 6D. These powers have been used extensively to issue a range of class orders either exempting certain offers of securities from compliance with ch 6D or by modifying the operation of ch 6D for other offers. Overall, ASIC may provide relief from the law where doing so produces a ‘net regulatory benefit, or any regulatory detriment is minimal and is outweighed by the resulting commercial benefit’; for example, film investment schemes. ASIC may also grant relief on a case-by-case basis.2 ©) Loading. Please wait The original prohibition on hawking focused upon the activity of canvassers who were paid by commission and who personally hawked securities from house to house, offering them in many cases to people who lacked business experience. Section 992A prohibits ‘cold-calling’: this bars a person from offering financial products for issue or sale in the course of an unsolicited contact with a retail client 23 In 2019, the life insurance division of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia pleaded guilty to 87 counts of offering to sell insurance products during unsolicited telephone calls which did not comply with the hawking provisions set out in s 992A24 The Bank was fined $700,000.7* This case followed a recommendation made by the Hayne Royal Commission for a wider prohibition on the unsolicited sales of insurance and superannuation products. The Hayne Royal Commission2® is discussed in Chapters 1 and 17. ©) Loading. Please wait

## 9.75.05 Crowdfunding and its different types explained

Crowd-sourced funding—or simply ‘crowdfunding’—uses technology to form connections between an entity seeking to raise funds, potential contributors and an intermediary facilitating the fundraising projects.22 These connections enable substantial sums to be raised from large numbers of contributors, each making a small contribution towards the fundraising goal. There are two main types of crowdfunding: reward-based and equity crowdfunding. In the case of reward-based crowdfunding, the contributor obtains a product, an altruistic reward or a charitable goal2® The second type of crowdfunding is equity crowdfunding (ECF). In this circumstance, the contributor becomes an investor in the equity of a company and may receive a share of the profits if the project is successful. ECF allows a company to offer equity in exchange for cash from a large number of investors where the offer (ECF offer) is published through an online funding platform? The following discussion is limited to ECF.

## 9.75.10 The regulation of equity crowdfunding

ECF challenges financial regulators because contributors are likely to be ordinary members of the general public, who are unsophisticated but enthusiastic ‘novel investors’ but who nevertheless represent a viable potential capital market for small-medium enterprises (SMEs).2° SMEs commonly find it difficult to raise equity funding.®! Therefore, in large numbers, even modest contributions from willing investors can create a sizeable capital injection in a low-cost accessible framework.£2 However, there are well-recognised problems that often arise in fundraising by SMEs, such as the high rate of failure and the risk of fraudulent activity. Some commentators have criticised the ECF regulatory framework, arguing it treats ECF as merely another form of corporate fundraising which ignores its distinctive and innovative nature as‘a new form of social interaction based on mutuality, cooperation and inclusiveness'22 The Corporations Amendment (Crowd-sourced Funding) Act 2017 (Cth) created a separate regime in pt 6D.3A of the Corporations Act for the making of ECF offers. Part 6D.3A (and its associated regulations) use a series of devices such as modified mandatory disclosure, limiting the products to vanilla financial products (fully paid ordinary shares) (s 738G and reg 6D.3A.01), limiting the offer to a $5 million issue (s 738G), and requiring a risk statement be displayed by the platform (s 738ZA) and in the offer document (s 738J and regs 6D.3A.02, 6D.3A.03) which warns potential investors as follows (in part): Crowd-sourced funding is risky. Issuers using this facility include new or rapidly growing ventures. Investment in these types of ventures is speculative and carries high risks. You may lose your entire investment, and you should be in a position to bear this risk without undue hardship. Even if the company is successful, the value of your investment and any return on the investment could be reduced if the company issues more shares. Your investment is unlikely to be liquid. This means you are unlikely to be able to sell your shares quickly or at all if you need the money or decide that this investment is not right for you. .. 84 The ECF intermediary (also referred to as the ‘responsible intermediary’ (s 738L(5)) plays a central role because it is the conduit through which all ECF offers are made and through which all funds are received and dispersed (s 738L). ECF intermediaries must hold an Australian Financial Services Licence (AFSL)®* expressly authorising the provision of ECF services (s 738C) and must conduct prescribed checks on the identity of the company making the offer, its eligibility to engage in crowdfunding, and information about the directors and others named in the offer document. The ECF intermediary must conduct these checks to a reasonable standard (s 738Q). Under the regime, companies with less than $25 million in assets and annual turnover will be eligible to raise funds (s 738H). Companies may raise up to $5 million via ECF (s 738G) in any 12-month period.£ An ECF offer must be made by publishing it with an ECF offer document on the platform of the ECF intermediary (s 738L(1)). This chapter examined the requirements under ch 6D of the Corporations Act that apply when a public company offers its securities to a cross-section of the public; for example, under an IPO. Chapter 6D requires that the offer be accompanied by a disclosure document. The most common form of disclosure document is a prospectus. Chapter 6D contains detailed regulation of the offer, the type of disclosure required, and whether exemptions from disclosure apply. The provisions of ch 6D also create a liability regime for breach and certain defences that may be relied upon by participants in the fundraising. Finally, this chapter discussed the provisions of ch 6D that regulate equity crowdfunding in Australia. O Loading. Please wait
