# Chapter 18 Financial services

18.05 Introduction
## 18.05.05 Retail investors

## 18.05.10 Definition of ‘retail client’ 18.10 Regulating the intermediary—client relationship

18.15 The broker—client relationship
## 18.15.05 Contract: the basic securities transaction
## 18.15.10 Contract: terms of the broker-client contract

## 18.15.15 Contra
lied terms: custom and usage
## 18.15.20 Agency
## 18.15.25 The broker-client fiduciary relationship
18.20 The financial adviser-client relationship
## 18.20.05 The statutory best interests obligation under pt 7.7A

## 18.20.15 Summary of financial advi:
rs’ best interests duties under pt 7.7A and the general law 18.25 Further obligations of advisers and dealers in financial products: licensing

## 18.25.05 Who needs an Australian Financial Services Licence?

## 18.25.10 Exemptions from the licence requirement

## 18.25.15 Meaning of ‘representative’

## 18.25.20 General licensee obligations under an AFSL

## 18.25.25 Financial services to be provided ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’

## 18.25.30 Revocation or suspension of licences 18.35 Summary ©) Loading. Please wait
awareness (86 per cent) that a high return is likely to mean that a financial product carries a higher risk! Although 67 per cent of people recognised that good investments may fluctuate in value, only 50 per cent of people can recognise an investment as ‘too good to be true’22 The survey found lower rates of financial literacy among younger people (< 35 years old) and older women (> 65 years old).22 The findings of the ANZ Survey with respect to superannuation products are significant. Although the focus of this and the previous chapter is on exchangetraded products, superannuation is the financial product that is most commonly encountered by average Australians. The ANZ Survey found that 68 per cent of superannuation fund members read their superannuation fund statements and 20 per cent do not read them.”4 The main reasons for not reading the superannuation statement were because members ‘couldn't be bothered’ or the statements are ‘too difficult to understand’ Notably, 33 per cent of superannuation fund members said they found reading a superannuation statement difficult.22 Retail investors can be contrasted with institutional investors, such as insurance companies and superannuation funds, that have large pools of money” to invest on stock exchanges.“ Institutional investors employ their own analysts and advisers to make decisions about investments. They may also influence the policies of listed companies.22

## 18.05.10 Definition of ‘retail client’

The definition of ‘retail client’ is key to the operation of this regulatory system. Section 761G of the Corporations Act defines the meaning of retail and wholesale clients. The underlying rationale is that because less protection is given to wholesale clients, a person must be treated as a retail client unless the provision clearly states otherwise. Section 761G states that a financial product or financial service is provided to a person as a retail client unless one of the specific exemptions listed in that section applies. Section 761G(4) states that a financial product or service is provided to or acquired by a person as a wholesale client if they are not a retail client. The focus of this chapter is on traded products, rather than insurance and superannuation products, so the relevant provision is s 761G(7). This section states that a financial product or a financial service is provided to a person as a retail client except in four circumstances: (1) the price or value of the financial product/financial service exceeds the prescribed amount in the regulations (currently $500,000)22 (2) where the financial product/financial service is provided for use in connection with a business that is not a small business (small business is defined in s 761G(12) as employing fewer than 100 people if the business is in manufacturing, otherwise 20 people) (3) where an individual provides evidence that they have the following wealth:
* net assets of at least $2.5 million (reg 7.1.28), or
* gross income for each of the last two financial years of at least $250,000 (reg 7.1.28) (4) the person is a professional investor.

The exceptions are intended for investors who may choose to decline the retail protections, presumably on the basis that they either have considerable experience in making investments or have the means to seek appropriate advice22 The term ‘professional investor’ is defined (narrowly) in s 9 of the Corporations Act. A financial service or product is not provided to a person as a retail client if the client is a sophisticated investor (s 761GA). In this situation, the licensee must be satisfied that the client has previous experience in using financial services and investing in financial products to allow the client to assess the merits, value, risks, the client’s own information needs, and adequacy of information given (s 761GA(d)). In this situation, the licensee must give a written statement to the client that the licensee is so satisfied, and the reasons and the client must sign a written acknowledgment that they are not receiving the retail client disclosures and obligations. For valuable applications of these definitions to cohorts of investors, see Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Cassimatis (No 8)*4 that involved the Storm Financial litigation. Another case on this point is Australian Securities and Investments Commission v AGM Markets Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 3). Here, Beach J found that the respondent had engaged in systemic unconscionable conduct while providing over-the-counter derivative products to retail investors in Australia?

## 18.05.10 Definition of ‘retail client’ (4) the person is a professional investor. O Loading. Please wait

Under the general law, the intermediary-client relationship is regulated by a combination of contract, agency and fiduciary principles. Intermediaries also have obligations under the Corporations Act, which are discussed below. The Corporations Act expressly preserves the operation of the general law, therefore the obligations under the general law will operate concurrently with the statutory provisions. This is illustrated below by reference to the broker-client relationship in Section 18.15 and by the financial adviser-client relationship in Section 18.20. The relevant fiduciary duty may be one of the existing status-based fiduciary duties, such as broker-client,? or it may be a fact-based fiduciary duty that was recognised by the High Court in Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corporation (‘Hospital Products’). If a fiduciary duty is found, the ambit of the obligations may be the traditional, proscriptive obligations (no conflict, no profit) or wider and more general prescriptive duties. The High Court, in Dalyv Sydney Stock Exchange Ltd,35 made it clear that brokers owe a traditional status-based fiduciary duty to their clients. The situation is less clear in relation to other financial services, particularly financial advice. In addition, a statutory duty under pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act is owed by financial advisers to act in the best interests of their retail clients when giving advice. The relevant law that is applied to a particular dispute may be shaped by how a case is pleaded when proceedings commence. As commentators have noted: A regulator in a regulatory action, or a plaintiff in a private action, may well rely on the most demanding standard—which is likely to be the no conflicts rule if it applies—to establish a breach, even if the statutory duties have been satisfied.2® This issue is discussed in more detail at Section 18.20 below and summarised at Section 18.20.15. The summary also explains the interactions between, and the remedial consequences of, the operation of the different bodies of law. ©) Loading. Please wait

## 18.15.05 Contract: the basic securities transaction

The basic or standard transaction for buying or selling securities on a stock exchange may be illustrated as follows: Buyer (B)—Buyer’s Broker (BB)—Seller’s Broker (SB)—Seller (S) Using the buyer as the reference point, the buyer places an order to buy securities with the BB. The BB enters a bid (which may be for a maximum specified price or for the best market price) into a device that is connected to the ASX trading platform. The bid price is considered by selling brokers who enter offers to sell until buy and sell orders are matched. The orders are automatically executed against bids of offers within parameters defined by the highest bid and lowest offer. The transactions are as follows:

(1) The buyer-seller contract that is ultimately reached between B and S. They will be unknown to each other. (2) The ASX trading contract between the two brokers. Under the ASX Operating Rules (ORs), brokers are liable to each other as principals: the BB is liable to the SB to pay the price for the securities, while the SB is liable to deliver valid documents of title if necessary. In the usual case, of course, each broker will seek out and obtain an indemnification from their client. Brokers are made liable as principals because the identities of the clients are not revealed by the trading platform transaction; therefore, the other broker cannot know or vouch for the creditworthiness of the other client. (3) The two broker-client contracts. Each contract is an agency relationship in which the client is principal and the broker is agent. There are other forms of contract that involve a single broker acting for both buyer and seller: these are called ‘crossings’ and ‘special crossings. Crossings The term ‘crossing’ is defined in OR 7100 as a transaction in respect of which a trading participant acts on behalf of both buying and selling clients to that transaction, or on behalf of a buying or selling client on one side of the transaction and as principal on the other side.24 For example, Broker A has an order from one client to purchase securities and an order from another client to sell the same number and type of securities. The broker is obliged (via OR 406038 and the ASX Operating Rules Procedures?*) to give other brokers the chance to match their own buying or selling orders to those held by Broker A. The offer is notified to the market as a potential crossing. Where the offer is accepted by another broker, the transaction will be of the ordinary type described above. Where no match is made, Broker A can’cross’ one order with the other. Special crossings

A‘special crossing’ is defined in OR 7100 as a crossing effected in accordance with OR 4810 and the ASX Operating Rules Procedures. A single broker acts for both seller and buyer who have already come to an agreement about the terms of the sale/purchase. The transaction is not effected through the market, but is merely reported to the market. Special crossings usually involve large trades and/or large portfolios; therefore, minimum thresholds for the procedure are stipulated. The special crossing rules reflect a recognition of the risk that a large block of shares placed on the market could distort the market. The special crossing mechanisms allow transactions in larger parcels of shares to be negotiated off the trading floor and then reported to the market. The clearing and settlement of securi

The clearing and settlement of securities transactions in the ASX market currently take place in the CHESS system.4° CHESS stands for ‘Clearing House Subregister System’ CHESS calculates the net obligations of each broker who trades on the ASX platform for each trading day, instead of settling thousands of trades individually. Net settlement takes place by novation of buy and sell contracts. A novation is an agreement discharging a contract and entering into a new one—usually on the same terms but with at least one of the parties being different. It is a method of releasing a party from the contract and introducing a new party in their place“! The novation occurs in CHESS by interposing several clearing and settlement agreements between the buyer and seller.

## 18.15.10 Contract: terms of the broker-client contract

The ORs and Listing Rules may either be express terms of the contract in the broker's contract note or they may be implied into the contract because they deal with practices or methods of dealing that have a recognised usage. In Bell Group Ltd v Herald and Weekly Times Ltd;2 Kaye J held that ‘to give business efficacy to an agency contract between a broker and their principal, there must be implied into their contract a term that the principal (i.e. client) will be bound by all articles, rules and regulations of the Stock Exchange which prescribe the manner of formation of a contract for the sale and purchase of a security’43

## 18.15.15 Contrac
implied terms: custom and usage In Con-Stan Industries of Australia Pty Ltd v Norwich Winterthur Insurance (Australia) Ltd,“4 the High Court set out the criteria for implying a term based on custom and usage: (1) whether the existence of the custom or usage, which will justify the implication of the term into the contract, is a question of fact in the particular case; (2) there must be evidence that the custom relied on is so well-known and acquiesced in that everyone making a contract in that situation can be presumed to have imported that term into the contract; (3) the term will not be implied where it is contrary to the express terms of the agreement; (4) a person can be bound by custom even though they had no knowledge of it.

## 18.15.20 Agency

The broker-client relationship is also based on agency principles. When a client gives instructions to a broker, the client grants actual authority to a broker, and the broker has a duty not to exceed that authority and to perform their instructions in good faith. However, a broker is personally liable for the contract and has a right to be indemnified by the client for all reasonable expenses incurred by the broker. Further, by custom and usage in the ASX securities and derivatives markets, a broker can close out their client's position in order to minimise loss associated with the client's default. The broker can exercise a power of sale, but it must be exercised carefully.4>

## 18.15.25 The broker-client fiduciary duty

As stated above, a broker owes a fiduciary duty to their client as agent for the client The leading case for this proposition is Daly v Sydney Stock Exchange Ltd,42 which recognised the general fiduciary duty owed by brokers to their clients. Here, Mr Daly approached a stockbroking firm to invest in the share market. The firm advised him that it was not a good time to buy shares and suggested his money be placed on deposit with the firm. The firm became insolvent and Daly lost his money. Daly made a claim on the National Guarantee Fund (this is discussed at Section 17.20.20). He alleged that the fiduciary duty was owed to him, a breach of which was a defalcation for the purposes of claiming on the fund. The High Court stated that, generally speaking, a fiduciary duty will be owed between a stockbroker and client. As commented by Gibbs CJ: Normally the relation between a stockbroker and his [sic] client will be one of a fiduciary nature and [will] place on the broker an obligation to make to the client a full and accurate disclosure of the broker's own interest in the transaction.48 But here, Daly lent the money to the firm of brokers rather than entrusting it to them as part of a broker-client relationship. A debtor-creditor relationship arose that took the relevant arrangement outside the terms of the relevant statutory provisions. Therefore, Daly was not entitled to compensation out of the fund.42 C) Loading. Please wait

As discussed above, under the general law a financial adviser-client relationship has elements of contract, agency and fiduciary law. In addition, as discussed in the next section, financial advisers owe statutory obligations to retail clients under pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act. The law pertaining to this area generally is summarised at Section 18.20.15.

## 18.20.05 The statutory best interests obligation under pt 7.7A

Part 7.7A of the Corporations Act establishes a regime that obliges financial advisers to act in the best interests of their clients. Section 961 states that the obligation arises where personal advice is given to someone as a retail client. The primary obligation is in s 961B. This section has a checklist for satisfying the duty to act in the best interest of the client (ss 961B(2)(a)-(f)). Commentators have noted that the concept of ‘best interest’ in pt 7.7A is left undefined and the checklist in s 961B(2) provides a’safe harbour’ if the financial adviser can prove that the steps in s 961B(2) have been taken2 The Hayne Royal Commission questioned the operation of the so-called ‘safe harbour; stating that they may ‘amount to a tick a box exercise rather than a substantive test’=! However, the safe harbour construction is debatable because s 961B(2)(g) has a ‘catch-all’ provision, which obliges a financial adviser to take ‘any other step that, at the time the advice was provided, would reasonably be regarded as being in the interests of the client, given the client’s relevant circumstances: In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v NSG Services Pty Ltd,>2 Moshinsky J held that s 961B must be read alongside s 961G, which states that the provider must only provide advice to the client that is appropriate, meaning the advice that would be given if the provider had satisfied the duty under s 961B to act in the best interests of the client.3 Further, pursuant to s 961J, a provider must give priority to the interests of a retail client when giving advice when it knows, or ought reasonably know, that there is a conflict between the interests of the client and the provider=4 The Ripoll Committee intended to impose fiduciary-like duties upon financial advisers.=2 However, as noted in the Quality of Advice Review, the statutory provisions are not fiduciary duties.** Nevertheless, as foreshadowed above, when construing the obligations under these provisions, particularly s 961B, it is unclear whether they create obligations which are narrow, proscriptive ‘fiduciary’ duty that follows the classic rules of ‘no conflict, no profit’ or a wider obligation to act in the best interests of a party=Z In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Westpac Securities Administration Ltd,*8 Allsop CJ in the Full Federal Court commented that the obligation in s 961B ‘draws on the concepts of fiduciary loyalty commonly resting on persons in such a position’52 His Honour considered that the correct approach to interpretation of the provision is as follows: ‘The circumstances that will lead to a conclusion that a provider of personal advice did not act in the best interests of his or her client may be drawn in part from the list of factors in s 961B(2), but the source of equitable faithfulness of the duty in s 961B(1) should also be recognised in the content of the phrase and the possible circumstances of its contravention Conversely, Jagot J in the same case was more sceptical about the ambit of the provision and its tendency to promote the tick-a-box approach to compliance. To discharge the duty in s 961B(1) the provider must have as its purpose or object acting in the best interests of the client. The provider can effectively prove that their purpose or object was to act in the best interests of the client by doing each of the matters in s 961B(2), each of which is essentially procedural. As the Explanatory Memorandum explains the fact of harm is not the criterion against which performance of this duty is measured ... The facts in Westpac Securities are set out at Section 18.25.05 and the Full Court found that s 961B had been breached. Westpac had been acting in its own interests and it was ‘fortuitous’ if the relevant outcome—a rollover of the customer's superannuation into the bank's accounts—was in the customer's best interests.©! The High Court dismissed an appeal from this judgment, focusing on the concept of ‘personal advice’. The applications of pt 7.7A in recent case law suggest that a flexible approach will be adopted. For example, in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Wealth & Risk Management Pty Ltd (No 2),3 a cash rebate scheme was declared to breach the provision because it was non-compliant with the financial services laws and involved the targeting and exploitation of financially disadvantaged people. Similarly, in Australian Securities and Investments ra Leta a a 1 nated Penne natn tad fn Had 65 an The applications of pt 7.7A in recent case law suggest that a flexible approach will be adopted.® For example, in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Wealth & Risk Management Pty Ltd (No 2),3 a cash rebate scheme was declared to breach the provision because it was non-compliant with the financial services laws and involved the targeting and exploitation of financially disadvantaged people. Similarly, in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Ultiga Lifestyle Promotions Ltd (in liq),S2 the adviser’s promotion of interests in a holiday time-share scheme breached ss 961B, 961G and 961J because the client’s relevant circumstances had not been identified (for example, a couple with five children who had casual jobs with no leave entitlements) and the advice was not appropriate. The provider had failed to give priority to the clients’ interests under s 961) because a commission was payable to the respondent's authorised representative if the consumer acted on the advice and acquired an interest in the scheme. 122010 Financial advicare: ic a fiduciary duty avalvina undar tha aanaral law?

## 18.20.10 Financial advisers: is a fiduciary duty evolving under the general law?

Over the last decade or so, some cases have recognised the presence of a fiduciary duty owed by a financial adviser to a client. Importantly, the facts of the cases cut across the categories where an obligation would be owed under the Corporations Act because the cases involve portfolios managed by the local councils that were in excess of the threshold set for a retail client under the Corporations Act. Therefore, the local councils did not fall within the narrow definition of retail client to whom the duties under pt 7.7A are owed. The cases are based on the status-based Daly fiduciary duty (which is discussed above), but also the fact-based fiduciary duty recognised in Hospital Products. The latter was refined by Finn J in Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL (No 2) as follows: A person will be in a fiduciary relationship with another when and in so far as that person has undertaken to perform such a function for, or has assumed such a responsibility to, another as would thereby reasonably entitle that other to expect that he or she will act in that other's interest to the exclusion of his or her own or a third party’s interest. As applied to financial advisers, in the first case, Wingecarribee Shire Council v Lehman Brothers Ltd (in liq)® (‘Wingecarribee’), Rares J of the Federal Court found that Lehman Brothers owed a fiduciary duty to the Wingecarribee Council. This was a class action case brought by three local governments (the Councils) against Grange Securities Limited (acquired by Lehman Brothers Group before the proceedings). The Councils argued a number of claims with respect to the sale of and sales advice regarding Synthetic Collaterised Debt Obligations (SCDOs).®8 These claims included breaches of fiduciary duty. Rares J described SCDOs as highly complex financial instruments, which are only to be sold to sophisticated clients who can withstand’a total loss of capital’®? Therefore, they are high risk products. Rares J commented that the concept of SCDOs is ‘beyond the grasp of most people’22 Grange put itself forward to the Councils as a financial adviser that understood the investment requirements of local government, including relevant legislative and policy constraints. The Councils explained that they were looking for a low-risk and liquid investment and Grange told them that SCDOs were appropriate for a conservative investment strategy. Further, the Councils explained to Grange that they did not have the time or competence to monitor the products and would require Grange to perform this role if the Councils were to invest in the product. Grange confirmed that this was part of its service and expertise. Given that the Councils asked for low-risk liquid products, the SCDOs were an inappropriate recommendation and clearly did not meet their needs. While the Councils technically passed the wholesale client test under s 761G, and thus could be sold these products, they were by no means financially sophisticated and were clearly inexperienced investors as regards SCDOs. Rares J held that Grange owed fiduciary duties. He emphasised several elements of the analysis above regarding fiduciary relationships. He supported the judgment of Daly, demonstrating that the client's reasonable expectations and trust and confidence are important in the financial adviser-investor relationship. However, he also relied on the principle in Hospital Products that the critical feature is that the ‘fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act ... in the interests of another person’? Rares J subsequently appeared to find a fact-based relationship derived from an undertaking given when Grange first negotiated the transactions for the Councils. Rares J then reverted to the Daly formula by finding that the fiduciary duty was breached by Grange in failing to obtain the consent of the Councils to a benefit obtained by Grange from the transactions; namely, placement fees from issuers of the products.22 Wingecarribee is a landmark case for two reasons. First, the finding of a fiduciary duty owed by a financial adviser to an investor independent of any principalagent finding was significant. Second, it was noteworthy that the obligations commenced without a formalised written agreement as to the advisory nature of the relationship. Furthermore, Rares J held that the Councils were to be defined as ‘financially unsophisticated’ even though they were defined under the legislation as wholesale clients. The second relevant case is ABN AMRO Bank NV v Bathurst Regional Council (‘ABN AMRO’)4 In that case, the Full Federal Court upheld the findings of the trial judge that the relevant body—the Local Government Financial Services Association (LGFSA)—owed a fiduciary duty to the applicant Council because the firm had’‘led the client to believe that it would act in their best interests in advising and making recommendations about financial products’Z* In this respect, the firm was engaged in a course of conduct over time which took it beyond being a‘mere salesman’ of the financial products in question. It knew the context in which the clients functioned and knew that the clients perceived the firm as acting in the client's interests and not in the firm’s sole interests. Therefore, in doing so, the firm moved beyond the role of mere salesman and acted as investment adviser and attracted to itself fiduciary duties: it undertook to act in the Council's interests rather than its own. The ABN AMRO case involved the rating, sale, and purchase of the structured financial product known as a ‘constant proportion debt obligation’ (‘CPDO’). However, the operative conduct was a conflict of interest because the LGFSA was receiving a commission from the product. This fell within conduct contemplated by the traditional definition of a proscriptive fiduciary duty.

## 18.20.15 Summary of financial advisers’ best interests duties under pt 7.7A and the general law
The current position under pt 7.7A and the general law can be summarised as follows: (1) Section 961B (and s 961G as necessary“) imposes a statutory best interests duty upon financial advisers. This may be equivalent to a fiduciary duty at general law but is probably wider. However, s 961B follows the contours of the Corporations Act and will only apply to retail clients. Statutory remedies will apply if this obligation is breached. In particular, it is a civil penalty provision under s 961K and a civil action for loss or damage arises under s 961M. The duty may not be excluded by contract under s 960A. (2) The cases so far tell us that when an undertaking is given by an adviser that goes beyond that of a‘mere salesman; and that undertaking is reasonably understood and acted upon by the client, then a fiduciary duty will arise. This may also apply to both wholesale clients (like the Councils in Wingecarribee and ABN AMRO) and retail clients. (3) This fiduciary duty arises independently of the statute and may be excluded by contract. It is probably wider than the traditional status-based categories of fiduciary relationships, such as the principal-agent relationship. (4) The nature of this obligation may follow the contours of the ‘traditional’ fiduciary duty, which obliges the fiduciary not to profit or be conflicted, but it may be wider and closer to a duty of care. If a fiduciary relationship arises, equitable remedies are available, including tracing and constructive trusts. O Loading. Please wait

In Australia, an additional method of regulation is to require people who provide financial services to be licensed by ASIC. The use of licensing as a regulatory strategy is discussed at Section 17.20.15. As mentioned in Chapter 17, the Financial Services Reform Act 2001 (Cth) introduced a uniform licensing scheme that extended the obligation to obtain a licence to all persons providing a financial service or dealing in a financial product. The licence is called an Australian Financial Services Licence (AFSL). The category of ‘licence holder’ is not restricted to members of ASX (namely, stockbrokers). This is an area of activity that overlaps with, but extends well beyond, the activities undertaken in the stock market. Aperson will need to hold an AFSL if they carry on a financial services business unless they are otherwise exempt (s 911A). What it means to ‘carry on business’ is defined in ss 18-21 of the Corporations Act, plus the common law which says the activities must be conducted with ‘system, repetition and continuity’ First, one must discern the meaning of ‘financial services business: The term ‘financial service’ is defined in ss 766A-D. Pursuant to s 766A, a person provides a financial service if they (inter alia): (a) provide financial product advice (s 766B); or (b) deal in a financial product (s 766C); or (c) make a market for a financial product (s 766D).

To determine the meaning of ‘provide financial product advice’ in s 766B, it is necessary to consider two primary questions: (1) What is a ‘financial product’? This is discussed in Chapter 17: i 763A); includes making a financial investment, managing a risk, making non-cash payments (s (2) What is financial product advice? A recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a report of either of those things, will constitute financial product advice under s 766B if: intended to influence a person in making a decision in relation to a financial product, or could reasonably be regarded as being intended to have such an influence; and * itis not exempted from the definition of ‘financial product advice’

Note that there are two types of advice under s 766B: personal and general advice. ‘Personal advice’ is financial product advice given or directed to a person (including by electronic means) in circumstances where: (1) the provider of the advice has considered one or more of the person's objectives, financial situation and needs; or (2) a reasonable person might expect the provider to have considered one or more of those matters (s 766B(3)). All other financial product advice is ‘general advice’ (s 766B(4)) 28 The High Court interpreted the meaning of the term ‘personal advice’ in s 766B in Westpac Securities Administration Ltd v Australian Securities and Investments Commission? upholding the decision of the Full Federal Court in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Westpac Securities Administration Ltd (Westpac Securities) 2° In that case, the bank had conducted a telephone campaign where existing customers (members) who held external superannuation accounts were approached to roll over their superannuation funds into accounts held by a subsidiary of the bank (the BT Accounts). The bank characterised it as a marketing campaign and the callers told customers that they were providing general advice only. Bank procedures encouraged the callers to ‘close the call’ which ‘took the customers to the point of decision-making over the phone in the call‘8! The Full Court held that there is no clear dichotomy between marketing and advising £2 because the conversations contained “helpful” recommendation|s] and proffered statements of opinion’ The decision to consolidate superannuation funds was ‘not a decision suitable for marketing or general advice ... [because] it requires attention to the personal circumstances of a cus- (a) applying for or acquiring a financial product; (b) issuing a financial product;

(c) in relation to securities ... underwriting the securities ... (d) varying a financial product; (e) disposing of a financial product.

Note that, under s 766C(2), arranging for a person to engage in conduct referred to in sub-s (1) is also dealing in a financial product, unless the actions concerned amount to providing financial product advice. What conduct is exempt from the definition of ‘dealing’? A person is not dealing where: (a) they deal on their own behalf (s 766C(3));

(b) they are a government or local government authority, a public authority or instrumentality or agency of the Crown, body corporate etc and they deal in their own securities (s 766C(4)); (c) they act as a sub-underwriter (s 766C(6));

(d) they provide a crowd-funding service (as defined in s 766F) 22 Finally, what is the meaning of ‘make a market for a financial product’? Section 766D explains this. A person makes a market if they:

* regularly state the prices at which they propose to acquire or dispose of financial products on their own behalf; and
+ other persons have a reasonable expectation that they will be able to regularly effect transactions at those prices; and
+ the actions of the person who states the price do not constitute operating a financial market (s 767A) because the person is making offers or accepting of-
fers to acquire or dispose of financial products on their own behalf or on behalf of one of the parties to the transaction. Therefore, a person who carries on a financial services business, as defined, must hold an Australian financial services licence pursuant to s 911A.22

## 18.25.10 Exemptions from the licence requirement

There is a long list of exemptions under in s 911A(2), but they include situations where: (1) general advice is provided by a newspaper or periodical (s 911A(2)(ea) or by means of an information service (s 911A(2)(eb)) or in sound recordings, video recordings or data recordings which is generally available to the public (otherwise than only on subscription) and where the sole or principal purpose of the newspaper etc is not the provision of financial product advice (s 911A(2)(ec)); (2) the financial service is provided by a representative of a licence-holder; the representative does not need to be separately licensed (s 911A(2)(a)).

## 18.25.15 Meaning of ‘representative’

Regarding financial services licensees, the term ‘representative’ is defined generally in s 9. This exemption is important because, in the securities and derivatives markets, most of the intermediary work is undertaken by representatives of licence-holders. The definition captures authorised representatives of the licensee, as well as employees or directors of the licensee and its related bodies corporate, or someone acting as an agent of the licensee. 2 Under this regime, the activities of representatives are supervised by licensees. It is an offence for a person to act as a representative where the principal is not licensed and where the representative is not an employee or director of the licensee, an authorised representative of the licensee, or an employee of an authorised representative (s 911B). The concept of ‘authorised representative’ is dealt with under s 916A. Licensees may give an authorised representative written notice of authority which authorises the person to provide specified financial services on behalf of the licensee. Licensees are required to notify ASIC of any persons authorised to be rep-

## 18.25.15 Meaning of ‘representative’

An important element of the licensee's supervisory responsibility is the imposition of liability upon them for all acts of their representatives in div 6 pt 7.6 (ss 917A-F). Under s 917A, the licensed person is treated as a principal in relation to conduct by the representative affecting a third person. The principal is liable for the acts of a representative in connection with the securities or investment business, whether or not the representative acts within the scope of their proper authority (s 917B). A limitation upon the liability of principals is provided for in s 917D which states that the principal is not liable if the agent's lack of authority is disclosed to the client. A principal is generally unable to contract out of a liability for the actions of a representative (s 917F(5)). In Casaclang v WealthSure Pty Ltd,22 Buchanan J in the Federal Court held that s 917B assigns responsibility to the licensee for the conduct of the representative even if the representative was on a ‘frolic of his own‘ The client need not have a relationship with the licensee. The client is simply a third party who could reasonably be expected to rely on the conduct of the representative (s 917A(1)(b)) 22 The holder of an AFSL must comply with the list of general obligations in s 912A. There is a broad obligation to do all things necessary to ensure that the financial services covered by the AFSL are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly. This obligation is discussed below. The other licence obligations can be grouped under a series of categories that are set out in s 912A: (1) Managing conflicts of interest (2) Dispute resolution systems for retail clients (for example, the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (AFCA)) (3) Compliance: this includes compliance with licence conditions and financial services laws and having relevant compliance procedures in place. ASIC may impose conditions on the licences (s 914A) regarding, for example, the types of financial product that can be dealt with (4) Supervision: the licence-holder must take reasonable steps to ensure that representatives comply with the financial services laws and adequately train representatives and ensure that they are competent to provide the financial services (5) Resources: the licensee must have adequate financial, technological and human resources to properly provide the financial services (6) Competence: the licensee must maintain the competence to provide the financial services, including providing adequate training for representatives (7) Risk management systems.

As mentioned above, s 912A obliges a financial services licensee to do all things necessary to ensure that the financial services covered by the AFSL are provided ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly: The meaning of this phrase was expounded by Foster J in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Camelot Derivatives Pty Ltd (in liq) (‘Camelot’)%4, who followed two earlier judgments: Story v National Companies and Securities Commission®> (‘Story’) and RJ Elrington The other licence obligations can be grouped under a series of categories that are set out ins 912A: (7) Risk management systems.
## 18.25.25 Financial services to be provided ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’ Foster J made the following points about this obligation in Camelot:

(a) The words ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’ must be read as a compendious indication [that is, a single, composite concept22] meaning a person who goes about their duties efficiently having regard to the dictates of honesty and fairness, honestly having regard to the dictates of efficiency and fairness, and fairly having regard to the dictates of efficiency and honesty (b) The words ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’ connote a requirement of competence in providing advice and in complying with relevant statutory obligations. They also connote an element not just of even handedness in dealing with clients but a less readily defined concept of sound ethical values and judgment in matters relevant to a client's affairs. (c) The word ‘efficient’ refers to a person who performs his duties efficiently, meaning the person is adequate in performance, produces the desired effect, is capable, competent and adequate. Inefficiency may be established by demonstrating that the performance of a licensee's functions falls short of the reasonable standard of performance by a dealer that the public is entitled to expect (d) It is not necessary to establish dishonesty in the criminal sense. The word ‘honestly’ may comprehend conduct which is not criminal but which is morally wrong in the commercial sense122 (e) The word ‘honestly’ when used in conjunction with the word ‘fairly’ tends to give the flavour of a person who not only is not dishonest, but also a person who is ethically sound.122 In Story the appellant was a licensed dealer and was employed as a stockbroker. He was attempting to interest a prospective buyer in shares in a mining company and faxed a study of the company to the prospective purchaser, which incorrectly asserted that ‘there was another active bidder in the wings: The transmission was sent in error to the mining company that was the subject of the study. The NCSC (the predecessor to ASIC) argued that the broker had consciously manufactured information in order to induce a client to deal in securities and revoked the broker's dealer’s licence under the predecessor to s 915C. The appellant sought review of the decision in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, arguing that NCSC had made an error of law as to his fitness to hold a licence. Young J observed that the section is designed to protect the public. In determining whether a licensee had performed the duties of a licence-holder ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’ under the predecessor to s 915C, the Court had to determine whether the licence-holder’s performance of his duties fell short of the reasonable standard of performance by a dealer which the public is entitled to expect. (a) The words ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’ must be read as a compendious indication [that is, a single, composite concept®2] meaning a person who goes about their duties efficiently having regard to the dictates of honesty and fairness, honestly having regard to the dictates of efficiency and fairness, and fairly having regard to the dictates of efficiency and honesty (d) It is not necessary to establish dishonesty in the criminal sense. The word ‘honestly’ may comprehend conduct which is not criminal but which is morally wrong in the commercial sense.122 Young J concluded that Story’s conduct fell short of this standard.

The next question was whether this finding should lead to the revocation of Story’s licence. Young J stated that one needs to weigh up several considerations, such as that qualified persons should be permitted to follow a profession and the need to protect the public from ‘inefficient’ brokers. Here, the plaintiff had favourable character references and, although it was ‘somewhat near the borderline’ the appellant's licence should not be revoked. To revoke the licence would be more punitive than a measure designed to protect the public. The approach of Young J is consistent with the general standards applied in cases involving occupational regulation.1% Compare Story to Elrington,1°2 where the licensee was in breach of the net tangible assets requirements of the licence and had offered the securities of an associate of the dealer without disclosing a conflict of interest. The Corporate Affairs Commission (a predecessor to ASIC) revoked its dealer's licence and the licensee appealed against it. It was held that failure to notify the breach of the net tangible assets requirement (within one day) did not justify revocation of licence. However, the conduct with respect to the conflict of interest did justify revocation because the conduct was ‘morally wrong in the commercial sense’!°8 This is an objective test. Recent examples of conduct that was found to breach s 912A include charging fees for no service!©2 and a failure by the licensee to manage cybersecurity risks.110

## 18.25.30 Revocation or suspension of licences
Where a breach of a licence condition occurs, a licence-holder is required to provide a written report to ASIC within the timeframes set out in s 912D. ASIC has the power to revoke an AFSL, either with or without a hearing. Licences may be suspended or cancelled under s 915B without a hearing in certain circumstances, such as where a person becomes insolvent under administration, is convicted of a serious fraud, or becomes incapable of managing their own affairs. The grounds upon which ASIC may seek to revoke an AFSL after offering a hearing are set out in s 915C. They include where the application for the licence contained false or materially misleading matter; the licensee is not a fit and proper person to provide the financial services covered by the licence, where a SUIVUDIY Ha Wa LUTEW IMUH NaOH IT FUEL WO HIUUCE @ CHEN LU UEa! IT SELUNTUES AH TEVOREU UIE UIURET > UEMIET SILENCE UNUEF Une PreEUELEDSUF LU > 719. The appellant sought review of the decision in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, arguing that NCSC had made an error of law as to his fitness to hold a licence. Recent examples of conduct that was found to breach s 912A include charging fees for no service2 and a failure by the licensee to manage cybersecurity risks.112 The grounds upon which ASIC may seek to revoke an AFSL after offering a hearing are set out in s 915C. They include where the application for the licence contained false or materially misleading matter; the licensee is not a fit and proper person to provide the financial services covered by the licence, where a banning order is made against a licensee; and the licensee has not or will not perform its obligations efficiently, honestly or fairly. The hearing requirements are set out in s 915C(4), and include the right to appear, to be represented in a private hearing, and to make submissions to ASIC. Note that ASIC is a public body and has obligations of procedural fairness under administrative law. Decisions in this area are reviewable by the Administrative Review Tribunal.l!2 Many cases involving the revocation of AFSLs concern licensees or their representatives recommending speculative high-risk investments to retail clients with little or no regard for their needs and investment objectives.43 ©) Loading. Please wait

Chapter 7 of the Corporations Act establishes a regime which requires certain documents to be given to retail clients when a financial product or financial advice is provided. There are three documents that must be given to a retail client depending on the situation:

+ Financial Services Guide (FSG)
+ Statement of Advice (SOA) + Product Disclosure Statement (PDS).

The FSG must be provided by a licensee (s 941A) or authorised representative (s 941B) where a financial service is provided to a retail client. The FSG must be given to the client as soon as practicable after it becomes apparent that it is likely that the financial service will be provided and, in any case, it must be given before the financial service is provided (s 941D). The giving of the information in the FSG may be satisfied by a website disclosure if the requirements of pt 7.7 div 2A are satisfied. The content of the FSG is set out in ss 942B and 942C and, inter alia, requires details about the provider, special instructions, remuneration (including commissions) and associations that create conflicts of interest. The level of information required is that which would be reasonably required by a retail client acquiring the financial services. An SOA must be given to retail clients where personal advice is being provided (s 946A) unless the investment is small (less than $15,000) and the advice does not relate to, for example, derivative or superannuation products (s 946AA and reg 7.7.09A). The content of an SOA is stated in ss 947B (for a licensee) and 947C (for an authorised representative) and again this includes details about the advice, remuneration (including commissions) and information about conflicts of interest. In addition, where the financial product is regarded as a derivative (a product to manage financial risk), there will be a further requirement to supply a PDS to a retail client. The obligation to provide a PDS does not apply to securities (a financial investment product) (s 1010A). The obligation to provide a PDS is placed upon the licensee and their authorised representative where there is a recommendation to acquire the derivative and in certain issue and sale situations (ss 1012A, 1012B, 1012C). Part 7.7 of the Corporations Act sets out enforcement options for the failure to comply with the disclosure obligations. Subdivision A (commencing with s 952A) creates offences and sub-div B (commencing with s 953A) establishes civil liability“4 In addition, since 2019, civil penalties are available to enforce many of the provisions discussed above: see generally s 1317E. O Loading. Please wait

This chapter has traversed various bodies of law that impose obligations upon intermediaries in the financial services sector to achieve the protection of clients involved in financial product transactions. Most, but not all, of the protections are directed at retail clients. Broadly speaking, the obligations are imposed via agency, contract, fiduciary and statutory provisions. The legal incidents of the intermediary-client relationship were exemplified by the broker-client and financial adviserclient relationships. These obligations are supplemented by a licensing strategy and product disclosure requirements. O Loading. Please wait QO Loading. Please wait
