# Chapter 14

Members’ rights and remedies 14.05 Introduction 14.10 Members’ rights and the common law: the rule in Foss v Harbottle 14.15 Common law exceptions to Foss v Harbottle
## 14.15.05 Ultra vires actions
## 14.15.10 Special majority
## 14.15.15 Infringement of a member's personal rights

## 14.15.20 Fraud on the minority

## 14.15.25 The interests of justice 14.20 General law remedies still available to minority shareholders

## 14.20.05 Gambotto’s Case and expropriation of shares

## 14.20.10 Infringement of a member's personal rights 14.25 Statutory remedies available to members

## 14.30.05 Standing

## 14.30.10 Type of conduct

## 14.30.15 The grounds for complaint

## 14.30.20 Orders 14.35 The statutory derivative action: pt 2F.1A

## 14.35.05 Who may apply for a derivative action?

## 14.35.10 Grounds for granting leave

## 14.35.15 Other court orders

## 14.35.20 Derivative actions and the remedy for oppression 14.40 Winding up: s 461

## 14.40.05 The just and equitable ground: breakdown of mutual trust

## 14.40.10 The iust and eauitable around: failure of substratum

This chapter addresses the rights of company members to protect their own interests or those of the company. This chapter focuses on the rights of shareholders in a company limited by share capital! but the principles and rules discussed here apply equally to members of companies limited by guarantee. The legal protections and remedies discussed here can arise in a number of situations.2 Atypical situation is a contest of interests between shareholders and those who control the management of the company. The matters that can give rise toa dispute include: disregard by management of a shareholder's rights (including rights to participate in meetings); dilution of a shareholder's voting power by the issue of new voting shares; ongoing mismanagement of the company; few or no dividends being paid to shareholders; involuntary expropriation of shares; alterations to the constitution that disadvantage minority shareholders; and inadequate provision of information about the company’s affairs. These contests can be subdivided, depending upon who is purporting to speak for the company. On the one hand, there may be a contest between shareholders and directors, where the directors are exercising their powers of company management in ways that adversely affect the shareholders’ interests. On the other hand, there may be a contest among shareholders themselves where, for example, a minority group of shareholders disagrees with a decision made at a general meeting by a majority vote. Here the question is whether the law should give recognition to the position of minority shareholders. This highlights the tension between two competing views of the corporation. On one view, we might respond to these situations from a contractual perspective, as outlined in Chapter 2. We could argue that shareholders have come together through a process of voluntary agreement embodied in the corporate constitution and the Corporations Act. Those documents spell out the rights of members, allowing the possibility that individual members may find themselves out-voted in meetings. These contractual arrangements are reinforced by the law relating to directors’ duties (discussed in Chapters 10 to 13) which is intended to protect members from self-serving managerial conduct. An alternative argument is that because of differences in voting power there is a risk that not all members in a company will be treated fairly, and so the state should provide mechanisms whereby minority members can seek to protect their interests. A related reason why minority shareholders should be given legal avenues to pursue their claims was suggested by Kirby P in the New South Wales Court of Appeal, who argued that minority voices are important to the maintenance of accountability within a corporate governance structure: People who pursue a path of integrity, disturbing settled practices long established, generally accepted and widely regarded by those involved to be perfectly reasonable, tend—almost without exception—to invoke at first amusement, bemusement and then extreme irritation on the part of those whose conduct is questioned. ... [Judges] should support corporate gadflies when their cause is the correction of apparently unlawful and self-interested action by directors, defended by oppressive conduct. This book has addressed some of the legal doctrines and assumptions that can result in conflicts between majority and minority members’ interests in a company. Chapter 7 (at Section 7.30.05) examined the legal assumption that decisions in a general meeting are made on the basis of majority rule. From the discussion in Chapter 5, we know it is legally permissible for a three-quarters majority of voting shareholders to amend the constitution (s 136(2)). There is potential for a majority group of shareholders who command a sufficient proportion of the voting power to alter the constitution to achieve a result that favours their own interests; for example, by increasing their dividend entitlements or their voting power Taking another example, a general meeting might be asked to ratify actions of the directors where those actions would otherwise amount to a breach of the directors’ fiduciary duties. But what if the majority of shareholders have the same personal interests as the directors and they vote to ratify the directors’ actions despite evidence this is not in the best interests of the company? What is the legal position of the minority shareholders in these The answers to these questions are not straightforward. There is a tension between two principles. One principle, enunciated in 1887 in North-West Transportation v Beatty, states that each shareholder is free to exercise their voting power according to their own self-interest. This follows from the fact that a share is an item of personal property, as are the rights that attach to that share. The concept of private property is deeply rooted in our legal culture and carries with it normative ideas of personal autonomy and freedom of choice. This was particularly evident in the decision in Gambotto v WCP Ltd, which we examined in Chapter 5 in the context of alterations to the constitution. The High Court, in rejecting the argument that a share was merely a ‘capitalized dividend The answers to these questions are not straightforward. There is a tension between two principles. One principle, enunciated in 1887 in North-West Transportation v Beatty, states that each shareholder is free to exercise their voting power according to their own self-interest This follows from the fact that a share is an item of personal property, as are the rights that attach to that share. The concept of private property is deeply rooted in our legal culture and carries with it normative ideas of personal autonomy and freedom of choice. This was particularly evident in the decision in Gambotto v WCP Ltd, which we examined in Chapter 5 in the context of alterations to the constitution. The High Court, in rejecting the argument that a share was merely a ‘capitalized dividend stream, attached great weight to the proprietary nature of the share® The second principle is that a resolution properly passed by a majority vote in a general meeting is a decision of the company2 and so those members in the majority should exercise their joint voting power in the best interests of the company as a whole. An example of this principle is found in the High Court's judgment in Ngurli Ltd v McCann:‘Voting powers conferred on shareholders and powers conferred on directors by the [corporate constitution] must be used bona fide for the benefit of the company has a whole‘ In Chapter 5, we discussed the application of this principle in relation to the alteration of the constitution. Finally, before moving on to examine the law in detail, we note that in practice a minority shareholder has other options in responding to problems within a company besides activating their legal rights. These other options may often be more appropriate or attractive, because they do not involve the same levels of risk, cost and delay that accompany legal proceedings. First, there is the ‘exit’ option: a disgruntled minority member can sell their shares and transfer their investment dollars elsewhere. This assumes that there is a ready market for those shares in which the shareholder can receive full value. This will not often be the case for small proprietary corporations. In a larger public company, if there is a ready market, the threat that disgruntled shareholders might transfer their shares could be a source of discipline over the corporate managers who might fear that too much share activity could attract the attention of takeover bidders. In practice, however, the availability of this exit option to large institutional shareholders may be limited, depending on whether their investment strategy is active or passive, or because the size of their shareholding may make it difficult to find a buyer, or due to the impact that the sale would have on the market and their other shareholdings? Second, there is the ‘voice’ option. Shareholder litigation is an obvious example of this,12 but there are other ways a disagreement can be voiced. As seen in Chapter 7, a sufficient number of minority members can requisition an extraordinary general meeting to persuade other members about the issue at hand. This option may be limited to situations where there is no permanent block of majority votes in the corporation. However, even where control of the company has become entrenched, a vocal minority shareholder could possibly cause a reconsideration of an issue. Third, a minority shareholder might rationally decide to do nothing. Shareholders can face considerable obstacles in monitoring, understanding, and correcting the actions of corporate managers. These obstacles include the complexity of the transactions involved, difficulties in obtaining accurate evidence, and problems in mobilising other shareholders. Often, putting up with it, at least for the short-term, may be the most rational option! Having noted these options, this chapter is concerned principally with the legal remedies that can be sought by minority shareholders. We will see that these are mainly found in the Corporations Act, but we begin by looking at the common law history behind the statutory provisions (at Sections 14.10-20). Then we turn to the statute, the three main remedies being actions for oppression and unfairness (at Section 14.30), the statutory derivative action (at Section 14.35), and the winding up remedy (at Section 14.40). This chapter then looks at three other forms of legislative action: injunctive relief (at Section 14.45), access to company information (at Section 14.50), and the use of civil proceedings by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) (at Section 14.55). Today, the rights of minority members are governed mainly by sections in the Corporations Act and by judicial interpretation of those sections. Nevertheless, we begin by examining the historical impact of the decision in Foss v Harbottle!2 on the present-day position of minority shareholders and on the development of modern legal principles. This case was decided in 1843. The impact of this case has been substantially diminished by subsequent judicial decisions and legislative provisions. However, in order to understand the thinking behind the present law, it is necessary to understand the scope and impact of this decision. In Foss v Harbottle, two shareholders in the Victoria Park Company brought an action against the five directors of the company. The action was brought on behalf of all the shareholders in the company, other than the shareholders who were also directors. The plaintiffs claimed the directors had fraudulently misappropriated the company’s assets. The Court held that the two shareholders could not bring the action. The argument on which this decision was based became known as ‘the rule in Foss v Harbottle, although the rule as it is understood today emerged only in cases subsequent to the decision 13 The rule in Foss v Harbottle is comprised of two interlocking principles. The first is described as the ‘proper plaintiff principle’ This principle was later restated in Burland v Earle as follows: ‘in order to redress a wrong done to the company, or to recover moneys or damages alleged to be due to the company, the action should prima facie be brought by the company itself’ In Cristianos v Aloridge Pty Ltd, the Federal Court supplied a more recent statement of this rule: It is well established that in an action to redress a wrong done to a company, or to recover money or damages alleged to be due to it, the company is the only proper plaintiff; and that the company’s name should only be used as a plaintiff by the direction of the company or its directors or, where the company has been placed in liquidation, by the liquidator. It is easy to understand the application of this principle when the company incurs loss or damage due to the actions of outsiders. However, the principle also applies when the wrong is committed by company insiders. When the case concerns an alleged breach of duty by the directors, it is the company, as a separate legal entity, that is owed the duty and has suffered the harm, and so it is the company that should bring the action against those directors. The second proposition in the rule in Foss v Harbottle is the ‘internal management principle’ Even if the directors in that case had acted as was alleged, the company’s constitution provided that the matter was one which could lawfully be put before a general meeting so that the shareholders could decide on the appropriate course of action. The case emphasised it was not the role of the court to take over the job of the general meeting. In the later case of Edwards v Halliwell, this principle was summarised as follows: ‘where the alleged wrong is a transaction which might be made binding on the company or association and on all its members by a simple majority of the members, no individual member of the company is allowed to maintain an action in respect of that matter. Combining these two principles, the rule in Foss v Harbottle is based upon the view that the majority wishes should prevail. It assumes all shareholders should be bound by this view because, either expressly or by implication, it forms part of the corporate contract that is now embodied in s 140(1) of the Corporations Act. The rule supports a limited role for the courts in intervening in corporate affairs. In Foss v Harbottle, Wigram V-C made a point of stressing the private nature of the company.2 The importance of majority rule and judicial non-intervention was justified in 1875 by Mellish UJ in MacDougall v Gardiner in the following terms: [I]f the thing complained of is a thing which in substance the majority of the company are entitled to do, or if something has been done irregularly which the majority of the company are entitled to do regularly, or if something has been done illegally which the majority of the company are entitled to do legally, there can be no use in having litigation about it, the ultimate end of which is only that a meeting has to be called, and then ultimately the majority gets its wishes. Is it not better that the rule should be adhered to that if it is a thing which the majority are the masters of, the majority in substance shall be entitled to have their will followed? If it is a matter of that nature, it only comes to this, that the majority are the only persons who can complain that a thing which they are entitled to do has been done irregularly.8 The rule in Foss v Harbottle had some advantages. It promoted certainty and predictability in corporate decision-making by preventing shareholders from pursuing legal action simply whenever they disagreed with a company decision. The rule avoided the prospect of multiple suits being brought by several The rule in Foss v Harbottle had some advantages. It promoted certainty and predictability in corporate decision-making by preventing shareholders from pursuing legal action simply whenever they disagreed with a company decision. The rule avoided the prospect of multiple suits being brought by several shareholders in respect of a single complaint. Furthermore, the rule reinforced the view that court resources should not be spent on resolving minor internal corporate irregularities, such as lack of quorum or insufficient notice for a meeting. However, the rule also resulted in significant problems. One problem is that, in a general meeting, the idea of majority rule must be understood in the context of votes attaching to shares rather than to shareholders. When a vote is taken it will be decided on a show of hands, with each member having one vote, unless a member demands that a poll be taken. On a poll, the vote is decided by counting the number of votes per share that each member holds (see the replaceable rules in ss 250E and 250J). It is therefore possible that on a poll one shareholder who controls many voting shares in a company can out-vote many shareholders who, cumulatively, control fewer voting shares. The operation of proxy voting systems can also affect voting outcomes. It cannot be assumed, then, that a majority vote at a general meeting is an indication of the will of the majority of the individual members. Another problem is that the joint operation of the internal management and proper plaintiff principles restricts the capacity of minority shareholders to bring actions to remedy wrongs done to the company. Yet this restriction was not always justified. Lord Denning MR provided a good summation of the problem. Suppose, he says, that directors who hold a majority of its shares defraud a corporation: and on all its members by a simple majority of the members, no individual member of the company is allowed to maintain an action in respect of that matter.1 ‘Those directors are themselves the wrongdoers. If a board meeting is held, they will not authorise the proceedings to be taken by the company against themselves. If a general meeting is called, they will vote down any suggestion that the company should sue themselves. Yet the company is the one person who is damnified. It is the one person who should sue. In one way or another some means must be found for the company to sue. Otherwise the law would fail in its purpose. Injustice would be done without redress.12 For this reason, the courts occasionally declined to apply the rule in Foss v Harbottle. '’) Loading. Please wait

The exceptions to the rule in Foss v Harbottle developed in a case-by-case manner. The cases reveal no clear policy direction, and they are sometimes difficult to rationalise with each other. Nevertheless, judges, academics and commentators tended to organise the cases under five headings that were recognised as the exceptions to the rule in Foss v Harbottle22

## 14.15.05 Ultra vires actions

It was established early on that when the action about which the shareholder complained was beyond the company’s power—that is, it was ultra vires—it could not be ratified by a majority. An individual member could bring an action to restrain an ultra vires transaction.2! Note, however, that this exception is no longer relevant because of the statutory abolition of the ultra vires doctrine (see Chapter 5 at Section 5.15).

## 14.15.10 Special majority

The courts have long accepted that a member may challenge the actions of the majority in general meeting when the rules require a special majority of votes be obtained as a prerequisite to a decision but only a bare majority has been obtained. The special majority requirement may be imposed either by statute or by the constitution. This exception recognises that the principle of majority rule has its limitations. There are some actions—such as altering the constitution—which are so important to the rights of shareholders that any special procedures provided for them ought to be followed in all cases. A majority should not be able to circumvent these procedures by ignoring them and then arguing that the capacity to remedy the defect resides in the general meeting, which the majority controls.22 This type of action is still relevant today.

## 14.15.15 Infringement of a member's personal rights

If rights are conferred on a member in their capacity as an individual member—for example, by the constitution22 or by the Corporations Act™4—then the member has a personal right of action to enforce those rights or prevent them from being infringed. These rights are discussed further at Section 14.20.10 below. The rule in Foss v Harbottle is concerned with wrongs done to the company, but here our concern is with wrongs done to a member. Such rights are enforceable against the company by a single member either in a personal action or, where the rights are also personal to other members, in a representative action. The personal rights ‘exception’ is not really an exception to Foss v Harbottle at all.® As a result, the right of a member to bring an action to protect personal rights has not been affected by the legislative responses to the rule in Foss v Harbottle (see Section 14.20.10 above).

## 14.15.20 Fraud on the minority

This was the most litigated exception to Foss v Harbottle. Its relevance is now historical, because of the operation of the statutory remedy for oppression (Corporations Act pt 2F.1) and the statutory derivative action (pt 2F.1A)—both of which are discussed later in this chapter. This exception permitted a shareholder to bring an action against the persons who control a company where those persons exercised their power in a fraudulent manner. ‘Controllers’ could mean the board of directors together with a majority block of shareholders, or simply the majority shareholders. This exception is usually described as the ‘fraud on the minority’ or ‘fraud on the power’ exception, but the real concern was that there had been a ‘fraud on the corporation’26 The minority member was permitted to bring an action to protect the interests of the company against the actions of its controllers. The term ‘fraud’ in this context is an equitable concept, with a wider scope than common law notions of deceit or dishonesty. It refers to situations where a power has been exercised for a purpose that is at odds with the reasons for creating that power.22 The fraud on the minority exception applied to an undefined range of situations where directors or majority shareholders ‘use their powers, intentionally or unintentionally, fraudulently or negligently, in a manner which benefits themselves at the expense of the company’28 It is clear, for example, that fraud could be established where the directors appropriated corporate property at the expense of the company.22 There was uncertainty beyond these relatively straightforward examples. Some of the difficulties centred on the argument that, according to the internal management principle, if a majority of shareholders in a general meeting is capable of ratifying directors’ conduct, then a minority member has no right of derivative action. A number of cases dealt with the capacity of the general meeting to ratify an improper exercise of (oS) Loading. Please wait

The common law provided a limited and uncertain scope for minority members to voice concerns about the actions of majority shareholders or corporate management. In response to this, statutory remedies and procedures have developed. We examine these legislative provisions later in this chapter. Before doing so, it is necessary to stress that outside the parameters of the statute some general law remedies still exist, for the benefit of members. Chapter 5 (at Section 5.50.10) examined one aspect of these general law rights when we looked at the High Court's decision in Gambotto v WCP Ltd, concerning alterations to the constitution and the expropriation of minority shares.2> Here, we note how that decision has been applied in subsequent cases. For example, in Winpar Holdings Ltd v Goldfields Kalgoorlie Ltd, it was held that the Gambotto principles do not apply where the Corporations Act provides a protective mechanism for minority shareholders in a share acquisition.2® Nor does Gambotto apply where a minority member loses shares as part of a selective capital reduction or a takeover offer.22 In Heydon v NRMA Ltd, the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered a demutualisation proposal whereby a company limited by guarantee that operated for the mutual benefit of its members would be converted into a company limited by shares that distributed profits to its shareholders. As a part of this proposal, members of the company limited by guarantee would give up their rights in exchange for shares. Malcolm and Ormiston AJJA held that this did not involve an expropriation of minority shares or of valuable property rights attaching to shares, since all members were affected by the demutualisation. Therefore, the Gambotto principles did not apply. In dissent, McPherson AJA argued that Gambotto’s Case was not confined to expropriations of minority shares by a majority—it extended to any expropriatory amendment Another remedy at general law is that a member may have a right of action to complain about the infringement of personal rights which are granted either by statute or by the constitution. We now examine this right of personal action in more detail. Amember has a right to sue to protect a personal right that is granted either by statute, case law, or by the constitution. In the case of the constitution, this action is based upon s 140(1) which gives the constitution contractual status. We discussed this in Chapter 5 and the reader is referred to that discussion. As noted earlier (at Section 14.15.15), the courts recognised that the protection of personal rights fell outside the rule in Foss v Harbottle. But while this right of action had the potential to allow the courts to avoid the strict consequences of the rule in Foss v Harbottle, that potential was not always fulfilled. This is because the distinction between what constitutes a personal right and a corporate right is not always clear. Professor Sealy has made the following observation: A judge has only to assert that he [sic] regards the case as raising a matter of individual rights to give himself jurisdiction; alternatively he has the choice of declaring that the wrong was one done to the company and he can show the plaintiff the door. ... Characteristically, this vital pre-judgment of the situation is supported by only the barest of reasoning and authority, if any at all; and, of course, the longer that judges go on doing this, the wider the range of potentially contradictory dicta there will be in the reports to confuse future generations.22 As Sealy indicates, this flexibility has led to inconsistent decisions. In some cases, the courts adhered to the internal management rule in response to an infringement of a personal right. In other words, the infringement has been categorised as an irregularity that can be remedied or ratified by a general meeting. In MacDougall v Gardiner, a general meeting was held during which five shareholders demanded that the vote on a particular issue should be taken by a poll, rather than a show of hands.“° This demand was made in accordance with provisions in the constitution. The demand was refused, and the shareholders sought an order that the refusal was invalid and an infringement of their personal rights. The Court disagreed, holding that the refusal was simply an internal irregularity that was capable of ratification by the general meeting. The Court justified this by arguing that the category of personal rights should not be allowed to override the interests of the majority in the company4? This decision can be contrasted with Pender v Lushington, which was decided only two years later. The constitution of the company stated each member had one vote for every 10 shares held, with a maximum of 100 votes per member. A shareholder sought to avoid this restriction by distributing his shareholding amongst some nominee shareholders. At a general meeting, the chair refused to count the votes held by the nominees. The Court held that a shareholder has an enforceable personal right to have their votes counted and recorded at a general meeting.*2 The judgments in these two cases do not make it clear sought an order that the refusal was invalid and an infringement of their personal rights. The Court disagreed, holding that the refusal was simply an internal irregularity that was capable of ratification by the general meeting. The Court justified this by arguing that the category of personal rights should not be allowed to override the interests of the majority in the company4! This decision can be contrasted with Pender v Lushington, which was decided only two years later. The constitution of the company stated each member had one vote for every 10 shares held, with a maximum of 100 votes per member. A shareholder sought to avoid this restriction by distributing his shareholding amongst some nominee shareholders. At a general meeting, the chair refused to count the votes held by the nominees. The Court held that a shareholder has an enforceable personal right to have their votes counted and recorded at a general meeting.*2 The judgments in these two cases do not make it clear why the right to have votes counted is personally enforceable while the right to demand a poll is not. In Australia, the use of the personal rights argument received expansive treatment from King CJ in the 1988 case of Residues Treatment & Trading Co Ltdv Southern Resources Ltd (No 4).43 The facts of the case involve a takeover offer made to the shareholders in the Southern Resources company, and an attempt by the directors to defend the company against that offer by making an allotment of new shares to a friendly third party. The takeover offeror was the holding company of two minority shareholders in Southern Resources. The effect of the fresh allotment would be to dilute the shareholding of the takeover offeror. The two minority shareholders brought an action against the directors, alleging a breach of fiduciary duty in making the share allotment and seeking to have the allotment set aside. The directors argued the plaintiff had no standing to bring the action because the wrong (if there was one) had been done to the company and the proper plaintiff principle should apply. They argued that a majority of members at a general meeting could approve the share allotment, and the Court should not hear the action. Here, the directors relied on the internal management principle. The Supreme Court of South Australia unanimously rejected both of these arguments. On the first argument, King CJ reviewed a number of cases in which individual shareholders challenged share allotments by the directors, via a personal action.“4 His Honour found that the issue of the plaintiff’s standing had either not been raised or had not been specifically discussed by the courts. Despite the absence of clear authority, in King CJ's opinion there were ‘strong indications’ that a shareholder has a personal right to be protected against the dilution of his or her voting rights by the improper action of the directors: ‘A member's voting rights and the rights of participation which they provide in the decision making of the company are a fundamental attribute of membership and are rights which the member should be able to protect by legal action against improper diminution. The rule in Foss v Harbottle has no application where individual membership rights as opposed to corporate rights are involved. ... [T]here is a clear trend in cases of the highest authority tending to indicate the existence of a personal right in a shareholder, grounded upon equitable principles, to have the voting power of his shares undiminished by improper actions on the part of the directors and of his [sic] locus standi to institute and prosecute proceedings to protect that right 45 King CJ based this personal right of shareholders on equitable principles rather than on the statutory contract created by s 140(1). This is because the directors had not breached the contract in seeking to make the share allotment; they exercised a power given to them by the constitution. However, the directors had not exercised that power for the purpose for which it was conferred, and hence they breached their fiduciary duty.4® Turning to the internal management argument, King CJ doubted (without deciding the matter) that a majority vote could ratify a share allotment that was made for an improper purpose. At any rate, his Honour held that where there has not been any ratification by the general meeting, the potential for ratification cannot deprive a member of these personal rights.42 Despite the continued availability of these general law remedies, company members who wished to take legal action against the company or its directors faced considerable uncertainty. For this reason, statutory remedies were gradually made available to address the shortcomings of the common law. The Corporations Act contains several provisions intended to overcome the limitations of the pre-existing case law. It might appear these sections constitute a cohesive ‘charter of rights’ for company shareholders, but that would be misleading. These sections have been added to the legislation, amended, and interpreted in a piecemeal fashion. In some respects, these sections are a response to the limitations in the common law; in other ways, those limitations have continued to affect the interpretation of the sections. The remainder of this chapter examines the following sections of the Corporations Act: ss 232-5 (pt 2F.1): allowing for various types of court-ordered relief on the grounds of oppression or unfairness ss 236-42 (pt 2F.1A): the statutory derivative action, which replaces the derivative action at general law s 461: the winding-up provision, under which, on certain grounds, the court may order the winding up of the corporation $ 1324: the injunction provision, which also includes the possibility of an award of compensation, and is linked to breaches of the Corporations Act s 247A: governing the right of members to have access to corporate information. We also examine s 50 of the ASIC Act that empowers ASIC to commence civil proceedings. Since the mid-1950s, Australian companies legislation has contained provisions that allow a member to seek a court-ordered remedy where the member is being oppressed.48 The origins of the oppression remedy can be traced to the recommendations of a United Kingdom Board of Trade Committee in 1945. The ‘Cohen Committee; as it was called, argued that minority shareholders in proprietary companies faced considerable difficulties in obtaining appropriate remedies at common law. The Cohen Committee recommended the courts be given broad discretionary powers to make orders where’a minority of the shareholders is being oppressed’42 An oppression provision was included in the United Kingdom companies legislation in 1948.2 It is clear that the oppression remedy was designed to overcome the shortcomings of the common law in relation to minority members. Initially, the courts were cautious in interpreting the term ‘oppression: The legacy of Foss v Harbottle, with its underpinnings of judicial non-intervention and majority rule, remained strong. In 1962, the Jenkins Committee in the United Kingdom noted these limitations and recommended the section be amended so that, beyond oppression, a member could complain that the affairs of a corporation were being conducted in a manner that was unfairly prejudicial to that member's interests.>" It was not until 1983 that similar amendments®2 were made to the legislation in Australia, when the grounds for application were extended to the present formulation whereby a member can complain of conduct that is ‘oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against’ that member or other members. The remedy for oppression or unfairness is now found in Corporations Act pt 2F.1. The key provision is s 232. This section specifies the types of conduct about which an application can be made under s 233 for a court order, and defines the criteria used in deciding the application. A member can seek an order concerning the conduct of the company’s affairs, an actual or proposed act or omission by or on behalf of the corporation, or a resolution (proposed or actual) of members or a class of members.*2 The applicant must show that what has occurred or been proposed is either contrary to the interests of the members as a whole, or that it is oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, a member or members. As we discuss below, this remedy is available whether the conduct affects a member in their capacity as a member or in some other capacity. In the following analysis, keep in mind that pt 2F.1 applies to all types of company, whether with or without share capital=4 We examine the issues raised by s 232 under four headings: the question of standing, the type of conduct about which an application can be made, the grounds for complaint, and the range of orders the court may make.

## 14.30.05 Standing

Section 234 gives standing to three categories of applicant: a member of a company, a former member of a company (in limited cases), and a person who is considered appropriate by ASIC. We deal with these in turn. Amember of the company may apply for an order under s 233. Being a member means being registered as a member on the company’s register of members at the time the application is made (s 231). A person who has purchased shares but has not been entered on the register at the time the proceedings are commenced is not regarded as a member for these purposes. In Niord Pty Ltd v Adelaide Petroleum NL, the Court held that ‘an equitable interest as a transferee under an unregistered transfer’ is not sufficient to enable a shareholder to bring an action.** But what if the failure to register the shareholder forms part of the alleged oppressive conduct? In Re Independent Quarries Pty Ltd, the plaintiff held a properly sealed share certificate which had been issued by the company on the basis of a valid share transfer. However, the transfer had not been registered because the register was in the control of a rival shareholder. The Court held the plaintiff should be regarded as a member for the purposes of the application even though they had not been registered.5® A person to whom a share in a corporation is transmitted by will or by operation of law is a member for the purposes of the section (s 234(d)). The applicant's status as a member at the time of the application confers standing to bring proceedings. The courts have held a member can make an application in relation to conduct that occurred prior to becoming a member.2 A member may make an application whether the conduct which they complain of affects them in their capacity as a member, or in some other capacity, or affects some other member (ss 234(a)(i), (ii)).. Part 2F.1 applies to members not only in their capacity as members but also in other capacities in which they may have dealings with the company, such as being a director or employee. This is relevant for shareholders in small companies. Consider a proprietary company with a small number of members who are also the directors. As a result of a dispute, one person is unfairly removed as a director, thereby losing remuneration entitlements and being left to rely on the discretion of the remaining directors for dividend payments. As a shareholder, that person could be trapped in the company either because there is no market for their shares or because of a share transfer restriction clause in the constitution. The member could be left without anv wav of derivina a benefit from Former members of the company have standing in limited situations. Sections 234(b) and (c) state that an application may be made by’a person who has been removed from the register of members because of a selective reduction, or by a person who has ceased to be a member if the application relates to the circumstances in which they ceased to be a member’. Finally, s 234(e) provides that an application may be made by’a person whom ASIC thinks is appropriate having regard to investigations it is conducting or has conducted into the company’s affairs or matters connected with the company’s affairs’

## 14.30.10 Type of conduct

It is important to be clear about the scope or nature of conduct to which s 232 applies, and whose conduct is relevant when considering the application of the section. The application of pt 2F.1 is premised on the fact that the applicant’s complaint may relate to the way in which the company’s ‘affairs’ are being conducted (s 232(a)). This term is defined, in a non-exhaustive way, by s 53 of the Corporations Act, and includes conduct that relates to membership, control, business, trading, transactions and dealings of the company, as well as its internal management and proceedings, the ownership of shares in the company, the power over voting rights and disposal rights of shares, and the audit of the company. In Raymond v Cook, the Queensland Court of Appeal noted that whether particular conduct falls within the ambit of the ‘affairs of a company’ will depend upon an examination of the facts in each case. The Court added: Relevant conduct is not limited to external corporate activity. This jurisdiction [pt 2F.1] is intimately concerned with internal management and abuses thereof by individuals which tend to oppress others in the obtaining of their due entitlements from a properly run company. Section 53 ... expressly includes internal management and proceedings of the company, and many other matters of familiar company dealings and transactions as expressly within the affairs of a company ...© Five further features of s 232 should be noted. First, the section can apply to acts or omissions (s 232(b)). This means that a refusal by the directors to declare a dividend could be the subject of an application, as could a refusal to register a transfer of shares in a proprietary company. Second, the section makes it clear that a resolution of a class of members falls within the range of conduct about which an order may be sought (s 232(c)). Third, the section applies regardless of whether the act, omission, or resolution has already occurred or is proposed for the future. The section can be used by a member to prevent conduct which damages their interests before it actually occurs, or to seek remedies after the conduct has occurred. Fourth, the section directs attention to the ‘conduct’ of the company’s affairs. In Fexuto Pty Ltd v Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd, Priestley JA stated that this requires the court to look at ‘the actual conduct of the affairs of the company ... [at] what was being done rather than why it was being done’ Furthermore, the conduct can consist of a single isolated act Fifth, the section does not require that the conduct must have been carried out by any particular category of people, such as directors or majority shareholders. In Re HR Harmer Ltd, Jenkins LJ held that the section is ‘wide enough to cover oppression by anyone who is taking part in the conduct of the affairs of the company whether de facto or de jure’ The section extends to cover the actions of directors, a controlling shareholder,“ persons with de facto control of the corporation, a class of shareholders or conduct of a related company. The last-mentioned example deserves emphasis because it raises the question of applications for oppressive or unfair conduct in the context of corporate groups. Early case law had little difficulty in finding that nominee directors had acted oppressively in preferring the interests of the nominating body to that of the company on whose board they sat. In Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd v Meyer, the Co-operative Society had formed a subsidiary company. The Society held the majority of the shares in that company. The company's board of directors comprised the two remaining shareholders (Mr Meyer and Mr Lucas) and three nominee directors of the Society. The business of the company was dependent on goods supplied by the Society, which decided that the company’s business should be brought to an end. It did this by raising the price of its goods and diverting business to one of its own departments. The three nominee directors knew of this and acquiesced to the plan. Meyer and Lucas made an application under the oppression provision in the Companies Act 1948 (UK). One of the arguments in reply was that the activities of the nominee directors did not constitute conduct in affairs of the company, but instead in the affairs of the Society. The House of Lords disagreed. Viscount Simonds held that the affairs of the Society and the company were so intertwined that actions in the affairs of one were also those of the other. In Re Norvabron Pty Ltd (No 2), an order was made against the nominee directors of a subsidiary in a case where the subsidiary was wholly owned and controlled by a board identical to that of the holding company. It appears that a unified structure between parent and subsidiary is important in these decisions ©

## 14.30.15 The grounds for complaint

## 14.30.15 The grounds for complaint

Section 232 specifies two grounds for complaint. The applicant can argue the conduct in question is ‘contrary to the interests of the members as a whole’ (s 232(d)), and/or that it is ‘oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against’ a member or members (s 232(e)). We first deal with the second of these two grounds. When considering the ground of oppression, unfair prejudice or unfair discrimination, the immediate question is whether these terms should be read as three alternative tests or as a composite expression. The words ‘unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against’ were added to the section in 1983 with the intention of freeing the section from the restrictive interpretation it received from the courts by reference to the term ‘oppressive’° The judicial consensus is that the expanded expression prescribes a single or compound test rather than three alternative tests. In Thomas v HW Thomas Ltd, the Court of Appeal of New Zealand considered s 209 of the Companies Act 1955 (NZ), which referred to conduct that is ‘oppressive, unfairly discriminatory, or unfairly prejudicial’ The Court held that these words are not distinct alternatives: ‘the three expressions overlap, each in a sense helps to explain the other’2! The decision in Thomas was adopted by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in New South Wales Rugby League Ltd v Wayde.2 This compound interpretation was affirmed more recently by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Tzavaras v Tzavaras & Sons Pty Ltd.2 Despite this composite reading of these expressions, the courts frequently hear argument on just one element. For example, in Fexuto Pty Ltd v Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd, Priestley JA observed the trend in so-called ‘oppression’ cases that “[u]nfairly prejudicial” conduct has been easier to make out than “oppressive” conduct and is these days the more frequent basis for oppres- sion proceedings’4 We noted earlier that s 232 specifies two grounds for complaint. In earlier versions of this provision, the two grounds were included within the same paragraph. This invited judicial debate about whether the phrase ‘contrary to interests of members’ should be read as part of the composite expression2° The current structure of s 232 resolves this debate; the section is drafted so that the ‘contrary to the interests of the members as a whole’ ground occurs in a separate paragraph from, and as an alternative to, the ‘oppressive or unfair’ ground (ss 232(d)-(e)).2@ Nevertheless, the same set of facts may raise issues for each paragraph.2Z In Campbell v Backoffice Investments Pty Ltd, Basten JA noted that the wording of these two paragraphs gives rise to two points of distinction. One is that paragraph (e), unlike paragraph (d), could cover conduct that ‘operates prejudicially with respect to a member or class of members, as opposed to members as a whole’ The other is that the phrase ‘contrary to the interests of; found in paragraph (d), ‘would appear to extend not only beyond disparate treatment of members, but also beyond conduct oppressive to the members as a whole’2® The next question is how the courts have interpreted the joint expression ‘oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against. To answer sion proceedings’”4 The next question is how the courts have interpreted the joint expression ‘oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against: To answer this, we first consider interpretations of the single term ‘oppressive’ as it occurred before 1983 and then turn to examine the subsequent judicial treatment of the joint expression. A note of caution is needed. As indicated, the 1983 amendments were made in response to a narrow interpretation of the oppression remedy. While these earlier decisions are relevant, they must be read in light of more recent interpretations of the wider expression. The first major case under the original oppression provision in England—Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd v Meyer—exerted a strong influence on judicial attitudes about the scope of word ‘oppressive’? In the Scottish Co-operative case, Viscount Simonds resorted to the dictionary, holding that the idea of oppression denoted behaviour that is ‘burdensome, harsh and wrongful’ to one or more members of the company.22 The requirement that the behaviour complained of must ‘lack probity and fair dealing’ was added to this in the same case.®! In Re Jermyn Street Turkish Baths Ltd, Buckley LJ said ‘fo]ppression must, we think, import that the oppressed are being constrained to submit to something which is unfair to them as the result of some overbearing act or attitude on the part of the oppressor’22 In Australia, a review of the existing case law was conducted in Re Tivoli Freeholds Ltd? This case referred to, and accepted, the interpretations made in both the cases mentioned. There was strong similarity between the early decisions on the oppression provision and the pre-existing Foss v Harbottle cases in their reliance on the internal management principle. The courts were not keen on reading the statutory provision too broadly in an attempt to reform the unsatisfactory common law situation. For example, in Re Bright Pine Mills Pty Ltd, the Court took the view that ‘it was not intended by [the legislature] to give jurisdiction to the court (a jurisdiction the courts have always been loathe to assume) to interfere with the internal management of a company by directors‘ As Hill notes in her review of the section, the case law under the pre-1983 oppression section was notorious for the limitations that were judicially imposed.®> It was against this background that the section was amended in 1983. Cases decided by reference to the amended section indicate a slowly developing trend towards a more flexible approach. In Fexuto Pty Ltd v Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd, the New South Wales Court of Appeal noted that: ‘The addition of the words ‘unfairly prejudicial to’ and ‘unfairly discriminate against; to the original statutory reference to ‘oppressive, indicates an intention that the jurisdiction should not be confined by technical distinctions 8° In one of the first cases to consider the new provision, Re G Jeffrey (Mens Store) Pty Ltd, Crockett J began by stating that ‘the term “oppressive” must be given In one of the first cases to consider the new provision, Re G Jeffrey (Mens Store) Pty Ltd, Crockett J began by stating that ‘the term “oppressive” must be given the same interpretation as it was given prior to the amendment of the subsection, but he went on to acknowledge that ‘the newly introduced expressions ... clearly ... [make] the task of the applicant ... less onerous in respect of the conduct about which he is entitled to complain‘®2 On the facts of the case, a shareholder argued he had been locked into a company because no other shareholders would buy him out. The judge declined to apply the section, holding there was nothing inherently unfair in being required to abide by the decisions of the majority of the shareholders or directors. One year later, in Wayde v New South Wales Rugby League Ltd, the High Court of Australia had occasion to consider the oppression section. The board of New South Wales Rugby League decided that the Western Suburbs Rugby League club (‘Wests’) would be refused entry into the 1985 rugby league competition. New South Wales Rugby League was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee, and its membership was comprised of representatives of the different football clubs playing in the competition. The Wests representatives, as members of the company, brought an action under a predecessor of s 232: s 320 of the Companies Code. Four judges of the five-member Court delivered a joint judgment, which stressed that Wests’ task was to show that the decisions in question were ‘oppressive or unfairly prejudicial or discriminatory’ to their interests. The joint judgment noted that, in making its decision to exclude Wests from the competition, the board had exercised a discretion that was expressly given to it by the constitution. As long as the discretionary power to discriminate between different members was exercised bona fide and for a proper purpose, then the board's decision was not actionable under the section. The joint judgment stated that a different approach might be appropriate where the directors were exercising general powers of management rather than a specific grant of discretion. In that type of case, the court ‘may be required ... to undertake a balancing exercise between the competing considerations/22 and would examine the policy that the directors have pursued, to determine its fairness or unfairness. This follows the approach suggested by Richardson J in Thomas v HW Thomas Ltd: Fairness cannot be assessed in a vacuum or simply from one member’s point of view. It will often depend on weighing conflicting interests of different groups within the company.22 In his separate concurring judgment, Brennan J noted that the legislative intention behind the amended section was to establish broader grounds for judicial intervention than had existed previously. The earlier judicial definitions of oppression were no longer determinative: ‘[a]t a minimum, oppression imports un- JO) Aa setal aba tat Thomas v HW Thomas Ltd:

Fairness cannot be assessed in a vacuum or simply from one member's point of view. It will often depend on weighing conflicting interests of different groups within the company22 In his separate concurring judgment, Brennan J noted that the legislative intention behind the amended section was to establish broader grounds for judicial intervention than had existed previously. The earlier judicial definitions of oppression were no longer determinative: ‘[a]t a minimum, oppression imports unfairness and that is the critical question’! As with the joint judgment, Brennan J stressed that mere prejudice or discrimination is not enough; there must be proof of oppression or unfairness. But Brennan J differed from the other judges in not making the distinction between a specifically conferred discretion and a general grant of managerial power. His Honour held that unfairness was a question of fact and degree in each case, and the need for judicial intervention should be established on an objective basis by reference to ‘ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing’ In the circumstances of Wayde’s case, this meant that: ‘The Court must determine whether reasonable directors, possessing any special skill, knowledge or acumen possessed by the directors and having in mind the importance of furthering the corporate object on the one hand and the disadvantage, disability or burden which their decision will impose on a member on the other, would have decided that it was unfair to make that decision.22 The High Court’s reasoning in Wayde’s case was adopted in Re Spargos Mining NL, where Murray J characterised the section as being concerned with questions of fairness. According to his Honour: [T]he opinion required of the Court is that objectively viewed, the conduct of those in control of the company is in all the circumstances to be regarded as unfair to a particular member, a group of members, perhaps a minority group, or the members as a whole and ... unfairness may lie in the harm suffered as a result of the conduct of management, the prejudice caused, the lack of reasonable commercial justification for the course taken, or simply in the decision making processes within the company. This passage emphasises that oppression or unfairness can be found in either the effect the conduct has on members (substantive unfairness) or in the procedures used by those who control the company (procedural unfairness). The passage also makes it clear that pt 2F.1 includes, but is not limited to, actions for breach of fiduciary duty by directors.%4 Equally, bona fide actions by directors can be classified as unfair. As Brennan J noted in Wayde’s case: [If directors exercise a power—albeit in good faith and for a purpose within the power—so as to impose a disadvantage, disability or burden on a member that, according to ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing is unfair, the court may intervene. [I]f directors exercise a power—albeit in good faith and for a purpose within the power—so as to impose a disadvantage, disability or burden on a member that, according to ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing is unfair, the court may intervene.2= Similarly, unlawfulness, in the sense of a breach of the Corporations Act, the constitution, or other unlawful conduct will more readily lead to court intervention under pt 2F.1, although unlawfulness is not necessary to the operation of the section; the conduct of a company’s affairs may be oppressive even if it lawful.26 The application of the unfairness test to the conduct of directors was discussed in a subsequent case involving the same plaintiff and group of corporations as in the Spargos case. Jenkins v Enterprise Gold Mines NL involved an action by a shareholder against directors of a company brought under a predecessor to pt 2F.1. The Court stated that: It is for the court to decide whether in balancing the interests of the company as a whole against minority interests the directors have acted so as to unfairly prejudice the interests of the minority. The court decides this ‘according to ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing’ Whether the conduct is unfairly discriminatory will be judged on standards which reasonable directors with such skills as directors should have, acting bona fide, would think to be fair Itis clear from these dicta that we should be cautious in generalising from judgments based upon particular sets of facts. As was noted in Shamsallah Holdings Pty Ltd v CBD Refrigeration and Airconditioning Services Pty Ltd, ‘the impugned conduct is not to be assessed in a vacuum. It is necessary to look at the history of the company, the extent of its financial needs and the reasonable expectation of its members, among other factors/28 Similarly, in Australian Institute of Fitness Pty Ltd v Australian Institute of Fitness (Vic/Tas) Pty Ltd (No 3), Sackar J emphasised that ‘the court should be informed by the context in determining whether a decision is unfair’22 Furthermore, the courts continue to express caution about intervening in the exercise of corporate powers. In deciding whether to exercise power under s 232, the courts emphasise the need to ‘respect the traditional roles of directors and shareholders in relation to corporate management’ and not interfere ‘unless appropriate cause is shown’! In Sandy v Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (No 4), Pritchard J emphasised that: In determining whether conduct is oppressive within the meaning of the section, the courts are not concerned with reviewing the underlying merits of the decisions of the directors. ... Actions for oppressive conduct are not the vehicle for de facto appeals on the merits of management decisions. In determining whether conduct is oppressive within the meaning of the section, the courts are not concerned with reviewing the underlying merits of the decisions of the directors. ... Actions for oppressive conduct are not the vehicle for de facto appeals on the merits of management decisions.122 With the caution about generalising from specific cases in mind, the following matters are examples of conduct that are not likely to constitute oppression or unfairness under s 232:

+ being unable to dispose of one’s shares as minority shareholder where there is no attempt by the majority to frustrate the disposal!22
managing the company in an overbearing or conservative but otherwise proper manner to the dissatisfaction of a minority shareholder. Similarly, ‘oppression will not be found where a company has merely been mismanaged or managed poorly’!2> ‘it will not be oppressive for the controllers of a company to insist on the adoption of policies on matters of business judgment concerning matters on which there may be legitimate differences of opinion’! paying low levels of dividend at the same time as the directors of a small proprietary corporation are paid high but commercially reasonable levels of fees and bonuses!©2 similarly, ‘a mere failure to pay dividends, even where they are able to be paid, does not constitute oppression or unfairness but is capable of being oppressive in some circumstances: Those circumstances include the history of the company, the extent of its financial needs and the reasonable expectations of its members!°8 failure by directors to give members access to information that directors are not obliged to give, especially where the members are associated with a competitor!22 irreconcilable differences among persons involved in a ‘quasi-partnership’ company do not of themselves constitute oppression or unfair prejudice (although, as we discuss later in this chapter, they may be grounds for winding up)12 With the same caution, the following matters are examples of conduct which may be characterised as oppressive or unfair:

+ diversion of the company’s business by directors or majority shareholders to another company in which they have an interest, or conducting the compa-
ny’s affairs to advance their own interests at the expense of a minority shareholder!

+ analteration of the company’s constitution to restrict or extinguish the voting power of a takeover offeror'!2
* management of the company by reference to other interests in a corporate group, to the detriment of the first company!2
an alteration of the company’s constitution to restrict or extinguish the voting power of a takeover offeror'!2 repeated use of commercial tactics at board and general meetings which have the effect of depriving minority members of the right to fully participate in those meetings!4 the issue of shares by directors for the purpose of reducing another shareholder's stake in the company!!> a breach of fiduciary duty by a director in a small proprietary company, involving mixing personal and company financial affairs, failure to disclose, failure to call meetings, and obstructing the access of other shareholders/directors to company records!!& low dividend payments resulting from a failure by the directors to review the company’s dividend policy in the context of the company’s improving cash position 12 The separate ground for complaint under s 232 is that the conduct is ‘contrary to the interests of the members as a whole’ (s 232(d)). This ground has not received the same degree of judicial analysis as the oppression or unfairness ground. The decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Wayde’s case was based on this phrase, with the Court holding that it reflects the broad equitable limitation imposed on the actions of a majority voting block of shareholders by reference to ‘the benefit of the corporation as a whole’1!8 The Court went on to argue that ‘[t]he only legitimate interests of the members would be their interests as corporators. As corporators, considered as a whole, their legitimate interests must be circumscribed by, and found within, the constituting documents of the company’1"2 In Goozee v Graphic World Group Holdings Pty Ltd, it was noted that the phrase ‘members as a whole’ directs the court's attention to the interests ofan individual hypothetical member’; the test is objective.12° In Sandy v Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (No 4), Pritchard J reviewed the earlier case authority and noted that the phrase ‘contrary to the interests of the members as a whole’ has been equated with ‘the benefit of the company as a whole’ adding that those interests are ‘circumscribed by, and found within, the constituting documents of the company’!21 Two examples of conduct that could be found to be contrary to the interests of members as a whole are breaches of statutory or fiduciary duty by directors and officers,!22 and the diversion of funds by a company director to another company controlled by that director:

## 14.30.20 Orders

If the court is satisfied that the applicant has established one or more of the grounds in s 232, the court has two decisions to make. The first decision is whether to make any order at all. Section 222 states that the court‘mav! make an arder aivina the court discretion ta exercise itidicial caution ahout intervenina in a camnanv’s internal affairs those meetings!4 a breach of fiduciary duty by a director in a small proprietary company, involving mixing personal and company financial affairs, failure to disclose, failure to call meetings, and obstructing the access of other shareholders/directors to company records! low dividend payments resulting from a failure by the directors to review the company’s dividend policy in the context of the company’s improving cash position 12 Two examples of conduct that could be found to be contrary to the interests of members as a whole are breaches of statutory or fiduciary duty by directors and officers,!22 and the diversion of funds by a company director to another company controlled by that director]

## 14.30.20 Orders

If the court is satisfied that the applicant has established one or more of the grounds in s 232, the court has two decisions to make. The first decision is whether to make any order at all. Section 232 states that the court ‘may’ make an order, giving the court discretion to exercise judicial caution about intervening in a company’s internal affairs. This point was made by Brooking J in Zephyr Holdings Pty Ltd v Jack Chia (Australia) Ltd.24 His Honour noted that the section requires the court to decide two things: whether the relevant ground for complaint is established and whether the court should exercise its discretion to make an order. He continued: If, in a striking case, the court has a very clear view that serious detriment will result from a proposed act to the members as a whole, it may be induced to make an order without hesitation, even though bad faith is not established. Other cases may be much closer to the line. All sorts of gradations are possible. If in a doubtful case, the court decides to refuse relief, it may be difficult to say whether the refusal is based on a failure to establish the ‘ground’ under [s 232] or on the exercise of a discretion. The two matters must overlap. For the clearer and stronger the ‘ground; the greater the prospect of a favourable exercise of discretion 125 If the court decides to make an order, the second decision is what order or orders to make. The power to make orders is given by s 233, and the courts have stressed that the powers under that section only arise for consideration after the conditions in s 232 have been met26 Section 233 lists several examples but makes it clear that the court can make ‘any order ... that it considers appropriate in relation to the company’ The examples listed in s 233 include an order that the company be wound up (although courts have expressed the view that this should be avoided if there is a viable alternative);!22 an order for the purchase of shares by another member or by the corporation;/8 an order directing the company or authorising a member to institute, prosecute, defend or discontinue specified proceedings;12° or an order requiring a person to do a specified act or thing. For example, the court may order that an issue of shares be set aside, and that the company’s register of members be rectified.22 In deciding on which remedy to order, the courts have emphasised two points: it must be the least intrusive remedy available in the circumstances, and the aim of the order must be ‘to put an end to the oppression’! The indicative list of orders in s 233 includes an order that the company’s existing constitution be modified or repealed. It is equally open to the court to order that the company should adopt a constitution, as implied by s 233(3). Where an order is made about the repeal, modification or adoption of a constitu-

## 14.30.20 Orders
whether to make any order at all. If, in a striking case, the court has a very clear view that serious detriment will result from a proposed act to the members as a whole, it may be induced to make an order without hesitation, even though bad faith is not established. Other cases may be much closer to the line. All sorts of gradations are possible. If in a doubtful case, the court decides to refuse relief, it may be difficult to say whether the refusal is based on a failure to establish the ‘ground’ under [s 232] or on the exercise of a discretion. The two matters must overlap. For the clearer and stronger the ‘ground; the greater the prospect of a favourable exercise of discretion 125 The indicative list of orders in s 233 includes an order that the company’s existing constitution be modified or repealed. It is equally open to the court to order that the company should adopt a constitution, as implied by s 233(3). Where an order is made about the repeal, modification or adoption of a constitution, sub-s (3) states that the company does not have the power under s 136 to change or repeal the constitution inconsistently with the order unless this is permitted by the court. Orders for the purchase of the minority members’ shares are one of the more frequent forms of relief sought and granted. However, this requires the court to exercise its discretion, having found sufficient evidence of oppression or unfairness. By comparison, in some overseas jurisdictions, minority shareholders have a statutory remedy whereby, in defined instances, a shareholder can require the company to purchase their shares.122 This ‘buy out’ or‘appraisal’ remedy applies in certain situations where a dissenting shareholder is affected by a fundamental change (as defined in the legislation) to the company, even though there may be no oppression or unfairness. One of the advantages claimed for this type of remedy is that it‘recognises not only that there is a level of change to which it is unreasonable to require shareholders to submit but also that in many cases the presence of a disgruntled minority shareholder will be of little benefit to the company itself/123 In Jenkins v Enterprise Gold Mines NL, the Court indicated that s 233 should be interpreted broadly: Once the relevant oppression or unfairness is found, it is the obligation of the court to grant whatever relief is best suited to deal with that conduct. ... There is nothing in the language of [pt 2.1] which suggests that the court should be reluctant to interfere where that is necessary or desirable to give effective relief 34 The Court added that if the desired result can be achieved by a general meeting of the corporation, then that might be the preferable approach. An example of the wide discretion exercisable by the courts is found in Re Spargos Mining NL where Murray J ordered that the existing directors of the corporation cease to hold office and appointed an independent board for 12 months with instructions to investigate the affairs of the corporation and report back to the court.135 Another example is Hannes v MJH Pty Ltd.36 Mr Hannes was the governing director of a family company. Under the constitution, he had the right to the Qhase UI sates vy anUuner Hemmer UF yy Wie CorpUrauun— ant UrUer UECUNY Ue CUmpanly UF @UuUNInY @ MENIVEr LU MsuLULe, prosecute, UeTENU UF UIS~ continue specified proceedings;!22 or an order requiring a person to do a specified act or thing. For example, the court may order that an issue of shares be set aside, and that the company’s register of members be rectified.22 In deciding on which remedy to order, the courts have emphasised two points: it must be the least intrusive remedy available in the circumstances, and the aim of the order must be ‘to put an end to the oppression’! The indicative list of orders in s 233 includes an order that the company’s existing constitution be modified or repealed. It is equally open to the court to order that the company should adopt a constitution, as implied by s 233(3). Where an order is made about the repeal, modification or adoption of a constitution, sub-s (3) states that the company does not have the power under s 136 to change or repeal the constitution inconsistently with the order unless this is permitted by the court. Another example is Hannes v MJH Pty Ltd:36 Mr Hannes was the governing director of a family company. Under the constitution, he had the right to the whole management, government and control of the company, as well as control over the majority of votes at general meetings. Hannes and the other director passed resolutions that allotted ordinary shares to another company controlled by Hannes, and caused the family company to enter into a service agreement with him. That agreement contained terms that were favourable to Hannes, including a salary of $90,000, a luxury motor vehicle and provision for a termination payment of $500,000. At first instance, the judge found that Hannes’ conduct was oppressive and made orders that restricted his powers and amended the constitution. On appeal, the Court agreed that Hannes’actions had been oppressive, unfairly prejudicial, and unfairly discriminatory. However, the Court held that the trial judge's orders relating to the constitutional amendments had gone too far. As Sheller JA put it:‘I do not think the circumstances permitted the Court, in the exercise of its discretion under the section, to amend the [corporate constitution] so radically to alter the balance of power in the company:122 Part 2F.1A gives a person a right to bring an action on behalf of a company, in the company’s name, against persons who have caused loss to the company. This right of action is known as the ‘statutory derivative action’

The statutory derivative action was added to the Corporations Act in 1999. According to the Explanatory Memorandum accompanying those reforms, the intention was to address three shortcomings in the common law derivative action. First, the common law right to bring a derivative action could be removed by a ratification of the impugned conduct by the general meeting of shareholders. Second, a shareholder who sought to enforce a right on behalf of a company faced the risk of having costs awarded against them in a case which was intended to benefit the entire company. Third, the courts had set strict criteria as a prerequisite to granting leave to bring such an action.138 The statutory derivative action abolishes the right at common law to bring a derivative action under the fourth (and fifth) exceptions to the rule in Foss v Harbottle (s 236(3))122 The statutory derivative action does not affect a member's right to bring an action against the company to protect a personal right.

## 14.35.05 Who may apply for a derivative action?

The derivative action provisions in pt 2F.1A deal with how a person obtains standing to bring such an action. These sections are procedural; they are not concerned with the substantive issues raised in a particular action, although substantive issues are likely to influence the decision about standing.“ The legislation does not define or delimit the type of matter which can be the subject of a derivative action. A derivative action is defined in s 236(1) as an action in which a person either brings proceedings on behalf of and in the name of a company or intervenes in any proceedings to which the company is a party for the purpose of taking responsibility for those proceedings on behalf of, and in the name of, the company. There are two broad categories of person who can bring a derivative action: members and company officers. To be a‘member'’ for these purposes, a person must be a current or former member, or be entitled to be registered as a member, of the company or of a related body corporate. The reference to related bodies corporate means that the statutory derivative action is relevant to those corporate groups that are defined by holding/subsidiary company relationships (s 50). To be a ‘company officer’, a person must be a current or former officer of the company.41 The inclusion of company officers as eligible applicants gives the statutory derivative action wider scope than the previous common law action, which was restricted to actions by members. The inclusion of former members also gives these sections wider scope than the oppression provisions which can only be used by a former member in limited circumstances. The section does not include ASIC as an eligible applicant. Prior to the introduction of pt 2F.1A, there had been a recommendation that the Commission should be listed, on the grounds that this would ‘assist in the recognition of the Commission as a protector of the broader public interest in the orderly administration of the affairs of companies’/“ In contrast, when the statutory derivative action was introduced, the Explanatory Memorandum stated that ‘the statutory action is not intended to be regulatory in nature, but to facilitate private parties to enforce existing rights attaching to the company—effectively, the action is designed to be a self-help measure’? As we explain later in this chapter, ASIC has standing under other provisions: notably s 461 of the Corporations Act (winding up) and s 50 of the ASIC Act (power to commence civil proceedings).

## 14.35.10 Grounds for granting leave

To commence a derivative action, leave from the court must first be obtained (s 236(1)(b)). The court must grant leave if all five criteria set out in s 237(2) are satisfied; if any of the criteria are not proven then the court will refuse leave.“ The five criteria are as follows. First, it is probable that the company will not bring the proceedings itself or take responsibility for them (s 237(2)(a)). One way of determining this will be to look at how the board of directors has responded to the notice of intention to apply for leave that the applicant has served on the company (see the discussion of the fifth criteria, below). Another factor will be the extent to which any board decision regarding corporate inaction has been influenced by directors whose actions are the subject of the potential derivative suit145 Second, the applicant is acting in good faith (s 237(2)(b)). The purpose of this requirement is to rule out suits in which the applicant's real goal is pursuit of a personal, rather than a corporate, remedy. The court will be required to review the motives of the applicant—a review which is likely to involve some judgment about the merits of the action. may be considered. Third, whether the substance of what the applicant seeks to achieve can be achieved by means other than a derivative action and without the involvement of the company in any litigation. Fourth, evidence as to the ability of the defendant to meet the judgment, or at least a substantial part of it, so as to assess whether the action will be of practical benefit to the company In Re Gladstone Pacific Nickel Ltd, Ball J noted that this criterion raises two questions: ‘One is whether it is in the best interests of the company that the action be brought. The other is whether it is in the best interests of the company that it be brought by the applicant/15! There is one limitation on the court's discretion. The legislation contains a rebuttable presumption (in s 237(3)) that granting leave will not be in the company’s best interests if the derivative action involves a suit between the company and a third party!®2 and the directors have decided that the company will not bring, defend or continue with those proceedings. Importantly, s 237(3)(c) requires that in making that decision the directors must:

* actin good faith for a proper purpose
* not have a material personal interest in the decision
+ inform themselves about the subject matter of the decision to the extent they reasonably believe to be appropriate
+ rationally believe that the decision is in the best interests of the company253

There is a further implication of the ‘best interests’ criterion. Even if the company has suffered a wrong that could, in theory, be the subject of a derivative suit, it may not be in the company’s interests for action to be taken. For example, the benefit to the company of the potential remedy may be significantly outweighed by the financial or reputational costs of the action. Fourth, there is a serious question to be tried (s 237(2)(d)). This criterion imports the test that is used by Australian courts in determining interlocutory injunction applications.™4 Under that test, the court must determine that the applicant's claim is not frivolous or vexatious, that it has a real prospect of succeeding, and that the balance of convenience favours granting leave. Put another way, ‘the applicant ... must make out a prima facie case in the sense that if the evidence remains as it is there is a probability that at the trial of the proposed action the company will be entitled to relief15® The court may be faced with the prospect of engaging in a‘mini-trial’ on the substantive issues of the case. As Bathurst CJ observed in Huang v Wang: It must be remembered that an application under the section does not involve a consideration of the underlying merits of the proposed litigation, except to the extent it is necessary to determine if there is a serious question to be tried 52 Fifth, the applicant has notified the company of the application (s 237(2)(e)). Although this is the last criterion in the list, procedurally it precedes the others. Before applying for leave, the applicant must give the company 14 days’ written notice of the intention to apply, together with the reasons for the application. This notice will give the board of directors the opportunity to decide whether the company should commence the action in its own right, thereby avoiding the need for a derivative suit. Alternatively, receipt of the notice might lead to the settlement of the dispute out of court, thereby avoiding the need for any litigation at all. However, giving notice is not crucial to the leave application in all cases; the court may grant leave in the absence of such notice provided that it is appropriate to do so (s 237(2)(e)), and provided that the other four criteria have been satisfied. Some guidance about when it will be appropriate to forego the notice can be found in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill that introduced these provisions: [t]he applicant does not need to meet the requirement of 14 days’ notice where it is not practical or expedient, thus allowing for an ex parte hearing where there is a need for urgent litigation’158 Neither the right to apply for leave to commence a derivative action nor the right to bring the action once leave has been granted will be negated by the fact that a majority of shareholders in the company has voted to ratify or approve the conduct in question. The court may take that ratification into account in deciding what order to make in the leave application or in the actual proceedings, but it must be satisfied that the act of ratification or approval was well-informed and that the members were acting for proper purposes (s 239). This reverses the common law position in which ratification by members had the effect of negating the possibility of derivative suit.

## 14.35.15 Other court orders

If the court grants leave to an applicant to commence or intervene in proceedings, then those proceedings cannot later be discontinued, compromised or settled without the leave of the court (s 240). The court has a wide discretion about the types of orders it can make, in hearing either the application for leave or the derivative proceedings. The indicative list in s 241 includes directions requiring mediation between the parties; an order directing the company ora fect of negating the possibility of derivative suit.
## 14.35.15 Other court orders

If the court grants leave to an applicant to commence or intervene in proceedings, then those proceedings cannot later be discontinued, compromised or settled without the leave of the court (s 240). The court has a wide discretion about the types of orders it can make, in hearing either the application for leave or the derivative proceedings. The indicative list in s 241 includes directions requiring mediation between the parties; an order directing the company ora company officer to do, or not to do, any act; and an order appointing an independent person to investigate and report to the court on the company’s financial affairs, or the facts or circumstances which gave rise to the proceedings, or the costs incurred by the parties. Section 242 deals with costs orders in proceedings that are brought after leave has been granted under s 237, and in relation to an application for leave. The section gives the court broad discretion ‘at any time’ to make ‘any orders it considers appropriate: There has been some difference in how courts have exercised this discretion.152 In Sub Rosa Holdings Pty Ltd v Salsa Sudada Production Pty Ltd, Barrett J described it as‘common place for a person given permission to pursue a claim on behalf of a company to be required, in the first instance, to bear the burden of costs’1®° This approach was queried by Finkelstein J in Wood v Links Golf Tasmania Pty Ltd, who argued that: [t]he purpose of permitting a person to bring an action in the name of the company is to prevent conduct which involves some element of harm. In most cases the wrongdoer will be in control of the company. That will be the reason the company itself is not bringing the action. The purpose of ... Part 2F.1A is to increase the likelihood that someone brings a claim which the company ought to have commenced. In those circumstances, I can think of no good reason why the company should not bear the costs. In Ananda Marga Pracaraka Samgha Ltd v Tomar (No 3)2 Dodds-Streeton J distinguished the decision in Wood, partly on the grounds that, in that case, the applicants had already been granted leave to commence a derivative action under s 237. In contrast, in the Ananda Marga case, the question of costs was considered at the time of the leave application as part of the ‘best interests of the company’ criterion. Dodds-Streeton J took into account the ‘extremely deleterious’ impact that a costs order would have on the company and its operations. Leave was not granted because this would not be in the company’s best interests. One of the major disincentives to shareholder actions is the high cost involved. ASIC has noted that: [T]he high cost of litigation means that either members’ rights can only be vindicated by shareholders with sufficient resources to bear the cost, at least on an initial basis or that some element of funding must be provided A study of all statutory derivative action applications brought in Australia between 2000-19 (168 applications in total), found that while just over half (55 per cent) were successful in obtaining leave, the majority (85 per cent) of those applicants were required to pay all costs at that stage, with no certainty regarding A study of all statutory derivative action applications brought in Australia between 2000-19 (168 applications in total), found that while just over half (55 per cent) were successful in obtaining leave, the majority (85 per cent) of those applicants were required to pay all costs at that stage, with no certainty regarding the recovery of costs after the derivative action The study also found that the main reason for unsuccessful applications was a failure to establish the ‘good faith’ and/or ‘the best interests of the company’ criteria in ss 237(2)(b) and (c)28 Before moving on to consider the winding up remedy, it is useful to compare the statutory derivative action with the statutory remedy for oppression or unfairness. There is an overlap between the two remedies in that, under the oppression remedy, s 233(1)(g) permits the court to make and order authorising a member to initiate or continue proceedings in the name and on behalf of the company. In McMillan v Coolah Home Base Pty Ltd (No 4), Parker J noted that ‘[t]he power to make orders of this type in cases of oppression pre-dates the statutory derivative action regime ... and must now be exercised with an eye to the restrictions on the court’s power to authorize such derivative actions While the facts of a case might give rise to claims under both of these remedies, in strict terms, these two actions have different purposes. The oppression or unfairness action is aimed primarily at providing a remedy for the member who brings the action; the derivative action is aimed at seeking a remedy for the company. However, even though a member's statutory right to bring an action for oppression is not derived from the company, the substance of many oppression actions has a strong derivative quality. The language of the oppression refers to actions that are ‘contrary to the interests of members as a whole’, and a significant number of oppression cases concern the enforcement of corporate rights and duties.1%8 Another point of comparison concerns the outcomes of the two actions. In practice, the oppression remedy ‘has largely become an exit remedy’1®2 This is because the remedy is used primarily by minority shareholders in proprietary companies who seek an order for the buy out of their shares in the company222 By contrast, the statutory derivative action is oriented towards the plaintiff's wish to remain in the company and to remedy or improve the way in which it operates. The derivative action is more effective in permitting members to give voice to their concerns.12- Pty Ltd, who argued that:
cent) were successful in obtaining leave, the majority (85 per cent) of those applicants were required to pay all costs at that stage, with no certainty regarding the recovery of costs after the derivative action The study also found that the main reason for unsuccessful applications was a failure to establish the ‘good faith’ and/or ‘the best interests of the company’ criteria in ss 237(2)(b) and (c) 18° While the facts of a case might give rise to claims under both of these remedies, in strict terms, these two actions have different purposes. The oppression or unfairness action is aimed primarily at providing a remedy for the member who brings the action; the derivative action is aimed at seeking a remedy for the company. However, even though a member's statutory right to bring an action for oppression is not derived from the company, the substance of many oppression actions has a strong derivative quality‘? The language of the oppression refers to actions that are ‘contrary to the interests of members as a whole’ and a significant number of oppression cases concern the enforcement of corporate rights and duties.168 Another provision of use to a minority shareholder is s 461, which defines the general grounds on which a court may order the winding up of a company. Section 462(2) lists the persons who have standing to apply under s 461 and includes‘a contributory’ (s 462(2)(c)). That term is defined in s 9 to include a person who is liable as a member or past member to contribute to the property of the company if it is wound up, and a holder of fully paid shares in the company. Recall from the earlier discussion at Section 14.30.20 that one possible outcome of an application under s 232 (concerning conduct that is oppressive or unfair, or contrary to interests of members as a whole) is that the court may make an order that the company be wound up (s 233(1)(a)). To that extent, there is an overlap between the operation of pt 2F.1 and s 461. As we saw in relation to winding up orders under pt 2F.1, the courts are cautious about making winding up orders in circumstances where the complaint is one of oppression. Similar reservations apply in the context of s 461 applications. In an often-cited judgment, McPherson J in Re Dalkeith Investments Pty Ltd emphasised that ‘winding up is to be regarded as a remedy of last resort ... which ought not to be granted if some other less drastic form of relief is available and appropriate’2 In Kokotovich Constructions Pty Ltd v Wallington, the New South Wales Court of Appeal noted that ‘the winding-up of a successful and prosperous company is an extreme step, and one which must require a strong case”3 Equally, there is no principle or presumption that it is inappropriate to order the winding up of a solvent company.1”4 One concern that a court may have is the effect that a winding up order will have on the interests of employees and other third parties. Certainly, winding up a troubled company can be viewed as a drastic step for the corporation as a legal entity. Yet it may be the only way in which the business can continue to function: by being transferred to a new owner and operator.“ It is true that winding up applications are often strategic ploys, made in an attempt to induce some other outcome that is more favourable to the applicant. Of the nine grounds for winding up which are specified in s 461(1), four are of particular relevance to minority shareholders. These overlap with the grounds in pt 2F.1 and it is common for actions to be brought arguing both sections.12Z First, under s 461(1)(e) a winding up application can be made on the basis that the directors are either acting in the affairs of the corporation in their own interests rather than in the interests of the members as a whole, or in any manner that appears to be unfair or unjust to other members. This paragraph has two. alternative limbs. In Re Cumberland Holdings Ltd, the New South Wales Supreme Court held that the first limb may be argued in any situation where the directors prefer their own interests (widely defined) to those of one or more members. The judgment pointed out that a minority shareholder could seek the winding up order on this basis, even though the interests of a majority shareholder may have been catered for. Similarly, the unfairness or unjustness of directors’ conduct, specified in the second limb, is considered by looking at its effect on ‘any significant body of other members‘178 The second and third grounds of relevance are found in ss 461(1)(f), (g), which refer to situations where the affairs of the company—or single acts, omissions or resolutions—are oppressive, or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, or are contrary to the interests of the members as a whole. These paragraphs duplicate the grounds specified in s 232 and the earlier analysis of those grounds applies here.122 Fourth, s 461(1)(k) permits the court to order the winding up of a company on the grounds that it would be ‘just and equitable’ to do so. This is the most frequently used ground for winding up orders under s 461 and so we examine it in more detail. In the case of application made by a member, an order for winding up on the just and equitable ground requires the court to be satisfied there is no other remedy available, and the applicant is not acting unreasonably in seeking winding up instead of pursuing that other remedy (s 467(4)). The reference to ‘no other remedy available’ raises an issue when a member seeks remedies under s 461 (winding up) or, in the alternative, ss 232-3 (oppression). In Asia Pacific Joint Mining Pty Ltd v Allways Resources Holdings Pty Ltd, the Queensland Court of Appeal confirmed that in such cases the requirement in s 467(4) applies to confine the court's discretion under s 233;122 that is, ‘the requirements of s 467(4) cannot be avoided by a court declaring that it is exercising only the discretion under s 233/181 Below, we discuss some of the more common situations in which the just and equitable ground for winding up has been invoked. It is important to bear in mind that these are only examples, drawn from the case law. The phrase ‘just and equitable’ is broad and the courts have emphasised repeatedly that: FER a a ae ee 8 ey ee eee Dee eo

As we saw in relation to winding up orders under pt 2F.1, the courts are cautious about making winding up orders in circumstances where the complaint is one of oppression. Similar reservations apply in the context of s 461 applications. In an often-cited judgment, McPherson J in Re Dalkeith Investments Pty Ltd emphasised that ‘winding up is to be regarded as a remedy of last resort ... which ought not to be granted if some other less drastic form of relief is available and appropriate’!2 In Kokotovich Constructions Pty Ltd v Wallington, the New South Wales Court of Appeal noted that ‘the winding-up of a successful and prosperous company is an extreme step, and one which must require a strong case’13 Equally, there is no principle or presumption that it is inappropriate to order the winding up of a solvent company.1”4 One concern that a court may have is the effect that a winding up order will have on the interests of employees and other third parties.“ Certainly, winding up a troubled company can be viewed as a drastic step for the corporation as a legal entity. Yet it may be the only way in which the business can continue to function: by being transferred to a new owner and operator.“ It is true that winding up applications are often strategic ploys, made in an attempt to induce some other outcome that is more favourable to the applicant. [t]he classes of conduct which justify the winding up of a company on the just and equitable ground are not closed, and each application will depend upon the circumstances of the particular case 182 Much of the case law on the just and equitable ground has involved companies that operate on the basis of close relationships between those who run the company. One example is closely-held companies that are more like incorporated partnerships (sometimes called ‘quasi-partnerships’).183 Note, however, that companies that operate in this way can range from small businesses to multi-million dollar commercial ventures.“ The classic decision which outlines the approach taken in these cases is in Ebrahimi v Westbourne Galleries Ltd185 to the interests of the members as a whole. These paragraphs duplicate the grounds specified in s 232 and the earlier analysis of those grounds applies here122 [the classes of conduct which justify the winding up of a company on the just and equitable ground are not closed, and each application will depend upon the circumstances of the particular case 182 where the House of Lords stated the general principles that should be applied. The just and equitable ground permitted the Court to subject the exercise of legal rights (which might be defined in a constitution) to equitable considerations, including considerations of a personal nature arising between one individual and another. The Court indicated that one or more of the following elements would be required to justify the winding up of the company on this ground: (1) evidence that the company was an association formed or continued on the basis of personal relationships of mutual confidence. This would be most likely to occur where a pre-existing partnership has been converted into a limited company (2) evidence of an agreement, or understanding, that some or all of the shareholders will participate in the conduct of the company’s business (3) the existence of a restriction upon the right of members to transfer their interest in the company, so that if confidence is lost, or one member is removed from management, they cannot then readily remove their interest from the company. More generally, the courts have emphasised that a breakdown of confidence between directors and shareholders in a company does not automatically provide the basis for winding up on the just and equitable ground. As explained in Re L&B Seafoods Pty Ltd: it is generally necessary to show that the breakdown is of such a nature and degree that it materially frustrates the commercially viable and sensible operations of the company in accordance with the shareholders’ expectations, that the loss of confidence is justified and that there is a restriction on the transferability of the shares of the party seeking to wind up the company185

## 14.40.10 The just and equitable ground: failure of substratum

One situation where the just and equitable ground for winding up has been invoked is where there is a ‘failure of substratum’ This describes the situation where the underlying purposes for which a company was originally formed are no longer being realised because of the actions of the company’s controllers. As described by Owen J in Thomas v Mackay Investments Pty Ltd: A company may be wound up where it has become impossible for it to achieve its main objects. If the company engages in conduct which is outside the scope of that which was within the general intention or common understanding of the members when they (3) the existence of a restriction upon the right of members to transfer their interest in the company, so that if confidence is lost, or one member is removed from management, they cannot then readily remove their interest from the company. A company may be wound up where it has become impossible for it to achieve its main objects. If the company engages in conduct which is outside the scope of that which was within the general intention or common understanding of the members when they became members then the company can be wound up. The rationale for winding up a company in this situation is that it is not fair for shareholders, who invested money in the company on the basis it will pursue a particular business or endeavour, to see their capital used for a different purpose. The case of Re Tivoli Freeholds Ltd is an example of this. There, the controllers of the company caused it to stop carrying on the business for which it was originally formed (theatre management) and to embark instead on a new type of activity (financing corporate takeovers).188 There can be difficulties in applying this argument. First, it is more appropriate in the case of companies with relatively few members, where there is often a strong connection between the members and the purpose for which the capital has been provided. Second, it can be difficult establishing the general intention and‘common understanding’ of the members, noting that this will be an objective inquiry.122 In the Tivoli Case Menhennitt J stated that the prime, but not the sole, source for determining this question is the company’s constitution, memorandum and its objects clause. This case was decided in 1972, when the constitution was comprised, in part, of a document called the Memorandum of Association which was required to include a statement of the objects for which the company had been incorporated. Section 125 now makes the inclusion of an objects clause optional, and because s 124 gives each company the capacity and powers of an individual, it may be difficult to determine the main objects of the company. Third, it must be shown that the ‘failure of substratum’ is not merely a short-term discontinuance of that business but a’final and conclusive abandonment of the business.122

## 14.40.15 The just and equitable ground: deadlocks

Another situation in which the just and equitable ground for winding up can arise is where the company’s operations are deadlocked. In Re Amazon Pest Control Pty Ltd, ‘a breakdown of relations or loss of confidence between a company’s members may ... support a winding up on the just and equitable ground where it frustrates the commercially sensible operations of the company’2 Situations of this type will be more likely to arise in a small, closely-held company. Again, the courts have been cautious, preferring to see an apparent deadlock resolved through the procedures in the constitution. A court will need to be convinced that the deadlock has not been manufactured with the aim of causing the company to be wound up. An example of this

## 14.40.15 The just and equitable ground: deadlocks

A court will need to be convinced that the deadlock has not been manufactured with the aim of causing the company to be wound up. An example of this occurred in Morgan v 45 Flers Avenue Pty Ltd.22 The plaintiff and the second defendant were brothers who decided to acquire an interest in a scrap metal business run by Metal Recyclers (NSW) Pty Ltd (‘Metal’). They did this by forming 45 Flers Avenue Pty Ltd (‘Flers’) which then acquired shares in Metal. Both brothers were appointed as directors of Metal (there were two other directors). As for the Flers company, the plaintiff and his wife held one share each, as did the second defendant and his wife. Each brother held a further 100 shares as trustee for a family trust. The business of Metal was carried on in a way which recognised that the second defendant was senior in decision-making to the plaintiff. The plaintiff gradually became dissatisfied with this arrangement. It was eventually agreed that he would resign his directorship in Metal, which in turn would lease him a scrap metal yard at which he could run his own business. It was also agreed that the plaintiff would sell his scrap metal to Metal. A dispute arose concerning the price for which the plaintiff would sell scrap metal to Metal. The plaintiff began to trade in competition with Metal. At about the same time, the board of Metal resolved to increase the level of directors’ remuneration and to pay large bonuses to the directors and to declare low dividends at the expense of the plaintiff. The plaintiff also refused to attend Flers meetings. The plaintiff sought an order under both the oppression and the winding up provisions in relation to Flers. As has already been noted, the oppression action was unsuccessful. In relation to s 461(1)(k), the plaintiff argued it was just and equitable to wind up Flers since its affairs were deadlocked. Young J rejected this argument, saying that‘a person cannot merely refuse to attend meetings of the company and then say that there is a deadlock. ... [T]he principle does not apply where the party who wishes to end the company has also been responsible for the situation which has arisen’!%3 There was no evidence, said Young J, that the other shareholders in the Flers company could not continue to operate the corporation.

## 14.40.20 Winding up and the public interest

Section 462(2) is not restricted to applications by shareholders—the section includes the possibility of an application for winding up being made by ASIC. This is in contrast to the statutory derivative action sections, which do not give standing to ASIC. In relation to winding up, ASIC may make an application where it is, or has been, investigating a company (ss 462(2)(e), 464). In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v ABC Fund Managers Ltd, the Commission sought winding up of a company on the just and equitable ground. Warren J noted three factors that apply in such an application: First, there needs to be a lack of confidence in the conduct and management of the affairs of the company. Second, in these types of circumstances it needs to be demonstrated that there is a risk to the public interest that warrants protection. Third, there is a reluctance on the part of the courts to wind up a solvent company. While the first and third factors have application even when ASIC is not the applicant, the second factor is of particular relevance in a case brought by the ih cMec. al As Pehl (Mn 2 eth
aed occurred in Morgan v 45 Flers Avenue Pty Ltd.22 The plaintiff and the second defendant were brothers who decided to acquire an interest in a scrap metal business run by Metal Recyclers (NSW) Pty Ltd (‘Metal’). They did this by forming 45 Flers Avenue Pty Ltd (‘Flers’) which then acquired shares in Metal. Both brothers were appointed as directors of Metal (there were two other directors). As for the Flers company, the plaintiff and his wife held one share each, as did the second defendant and his wife. Each brother held a further 100 shares as trustee for a family trust. The business of Metal was carried on in a way which recognised that the second defendant was senior in decision-making to the plaintiff. The plaintiff gradually became dissatisfied with this arrangement. It was eventually agreed that he would resign his directorship in Metal, which in turn would lease him a scrap metal yard

## 14.40.20 Winding up and the public interest

While the first and third factors have application even when ASIC is not the applicant, the second factor is of particular relevance in a case brought by the Commission. As was noted in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v CME Capital Australia Pty Ltd (No 2), ‘[t]here are important public interest considerations when ASIC applies for a winding up order’25 In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v ActiveSuper Pty Ltd (No 2), Gordon J explained that: [A] risk to the public interest may take several forms. For example, a winding up order may be necessary to ensure investor protection or where a company has not carried on its business candidly and in a straightforward manner with the public. Alternatively, it might be justified in order to prevent and condemn repeated breaches of the law.% This section allows the court to hear an application for an injunction in situations where a person has, is, or will be engaged in conduct that is in contravention of the Corporations Act (s 1324(1))22 The section covers attempted contraventions; aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring a person to contravene the Act; (attempted) inducements by threats or promises to contravene the Act; being in any way, directly or indirectly, knowingly concerned in or party to a contravention; or conspiring with others to contravene the Act. The scope of the section is made even wider by sub-s (2), under which an application can be made where a person refuses or fails to do an act or thing that the person is required to do by the Corporations Act. There is considerable diversity in the judicial interpretation and application of this section, with many aspects still awaiting definitive authority. With that in mind, the potential for the section to operate as a remedy for company members can be explained as follows. An application can be made either by ASIC or by’a person whose interests have been, are or would be affected’ by the conduct, failure or refusal. In Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd v Bell Resources Ltd, the Victorian Supreme Court held that a broad interpretation should be given to the question of standing under s 1324, consistent with the objects of the legislation in protecting the public in respect of the commercial activities of corporations.18 Hampel J decided that applicants who seek to show that their interests have been, are, or would be affected need not show that personal rights of a proprietary or similar nature are or may be affected by the conduct. Moreover, they need not prove that they suffered any special injury arising from the contravention of the Corporations Act. However, applicants must establish that their interests go beyond the mere interests of members of the public. This reasoning would include shareholders as persons with standing under s 1324. In Allen v Atalay (an interlocutory proceeding), Hayne J stated it was arguable that the Broken Hill test would also give standing to‘a creditor having a right to prove in the liquidation of a company’ In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Mauer-Swisse Securities Ltd, Palmer J noted that where the application is made by ASIC rather than by a private litigant the court will be more likely to give weight to the question whether the injunction ‘would have some utility or would serve some purpose within the contemplation of the Corporations Act’222 For some contraventions of the Corporations Act, sub-s (1A) deems that the interests of a person as a member or creditor of a company are affected by the conduct in question. This applies to share capital reductions, share buy-backs, and financial assistance transactions. These provisions are referred to in Chapter 8 of this book. The grounds for an application under this section relate either to a contravention of the Corporations Act, or to a refusal or failure to comply with the Corporations Act. Several sections in the legislation, such as the share transaction provisions in ch 2J, deem that breach of the relevant section, while not an offence, is a contravention of the Act, thereby inviting the application of s 1324. Furthermore, despite the decision of Young J in Mesenberg v Cord Industrial Recruiters Pty Ltd, the better view is that s 1324 is applicable to breaches by corporate officers of their statutory duty under ss 180-4.201 In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v ActiveSuper Pty Ltd (in liq), it was emphasised that ‘an injunction under s 1324 is intended to be remedial in character’2°2 Under s 1324, the court may make an order restraining the person from engaging in the conduct and, if the court considers it desirable to do so, an order requiring the person to do some act or thing. Moreover, s 1324(10) permits the court to order that damages be paid by the person who is contravening the Act to the applicant or ‘any other person’ (in addition to or in substitution for the injunction). There has been judicial disagreement about whether a court can order damages under s 1324(10) in the absence of an application for an injunction. In Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd, Cohen J held that the Commission could seek an order for damages simply on the basis that it would have been entitled to seek an injunction.2°3 By contrast, in Executor Trustee Australia Ltd v Deloitte Haskins and Sells, Perry J expressed the view that an order for damages under s 1324(10) could not be made unless there was an application for an injunction.2% Subsequently, in Dungowan Manly Pty Ltd v McLaughlin, Bathurst CJ noted that the ‘predominant view’ is that ‘damages can only be awarded in proceedings where an injunction is actually sought’22> CX) Loading. Please wait

Part 2F.3 of the Corporations Act specifies a procedure whereby a company member may gain access to information in the company’s books. Under s 247A, a member may apply to the court for an order authorising the member, or some other person acting on the member's behalf, to inspect—and if authorised, to copy—the company’s books. The word ‘books’ is defined in s 9 to include a register, any other record of information, financial reports or financial records however they are compiled, recorded or stored, and a document. The court may only make the order if it is satisfied that the applicant has demonstrated they are acting in good faith and that the inspection is to be made for a proper purpose. The court can also make other orders relating to the use which may be made of the information gained as a result of the inspection (s 247B). A person who inspects books on behalf of a member (such as an auditor or legal practitioner) can disclose the information only to the member who made the application or to ASIC (s 247C). The need for a court application and order may be avoided if the company adopts the replaceable rule in s 247D, under which the directors or the general meeting may authorise a member to inspect books of the company. In Mesa Minerals Ltd v Mighty River International Ltd,7° the Full Court of the Federal Court reviewed the case law and summarised the principles to be applied in considering an application under s 247A. The Court's summary helps to frame our explanation of the operation of pt 2F.3. An order permitting inspection will only be granted if the court is satisfied the member is acting in good faith and the inspection is to be made for a proper purpose. In the past, there has been debate about whether this refers to two separate requirements or to a single test. The Court in Mesa Minerals Ltd confirmed the accepted view that the requirement for good faith and a proper purpose is a composite expression rather than two distinct requirements. In support of this, the Federal Court quoted the judgment of Brooking J in Knightswood Nominees Pty Ltd v Sherwin Pastoral Co Ltd: '[a]cting in good faith and inspecting for a proper purpose means acting and inspecting for a bona fide proper purpose.“2 This composite standard is to be assessed on an objective, not subjective, basis,2°8 and the onus of proof lies with the member making the application.2°2 Much of the case law concerning s 247A involves consideration about the meaning of‘a proper purpose’ In Mesa Minerals Ltd, the Court noted that a proper purpose is one that is ‘connected with the proper exercise of the rights of a shareholder as shareholder’! An example would be seeking to inspect books to ascertain whether there has been a breach of directors’ duties, or whether there has been oppressive conduct.2"" The Court in Mesa Minerals observed that ‘faln applicant who has a significant holding and who has been a shareholder for “some considerable time” will more easily discharge the onus than one who has recently acquired a token holding’2"2 The applicant must show that the purpose behind the request is ‘substantive and not fanciful’, and not ‘artificial, specious or contrived’?"3 Similarly, the courts have demonstrated a disinclination to allow inspection where the applicant is on a ‘fishing expedition’ or where the member seeking inspection ‘is motivated by idle curiosity, or has in mind harassment, or even blackmail, or wishes to obtain confidential information for the benefit of one of the company’s competitors’ It is, however, a proper purpose for an applicant to be pursuing’a reasonable suspicion of breach of duty’2"4 Furthermore, ‘[alpplicants do not necessarily lack a proper purpose merely because they are hostile to other directors’2!* If the applicant has been granted, or is applying for, leave to commence a statutory derivative action then the court must also be satisfied that the application for inspection is for a purpose connected with the statutory derivative action or the application for leave (s 247A(5)). Finally, the court has a discretion not to grant an order even though it may find that the application is made in good faith and for a proper purpose.2-2 If the applicant has mixed purposes in making the application, it is sufficient if the ‘primary or dominant purpose is a proper one’2/8 As an example, in Humes Ltd v Unity APA Ltd (No 1)212 Unity wanted to inspect the books of Humes in order to determine whether Humes’ directors had breached their duty to the company. It was also apparent that access to the information in the books would assist Unity in a takeover bid it was making for Humes. Beach J held that the dominant purpose was to ascertain whether the directors had breached their duties, and that this was a proper purpose. The fact that there was also a secondary purpose was irrelevant.222 As noted earlier, the definition of ‘books’ is potentially broad, and the court has a discretion regarding the scope of access that the member is to be granted. In Acehill Investments Pty Ltd v Incitec Ltd, Debelle J noted that ‘[t]he procedure under s 247A is not intended to be a process as wide-ranging as the process of discovery of documents so that, as a general rule, inspection will be confined to, say, the results of decisions of directors rather than all the documents such as board papers leading to decisions’ adding that‘[t]here may be occasions where it is proper to admit inspection of board papers'22" A member's application is not automatically ruled out by the fact that they may have alternative means of obtainina the information they seek.?22 hostile to other directors’2!* If the applicant has been granted, or is applying for, leave to commence a statutory derivative action then the court must also be satisfied that the application for inspection is for a purpose connected with the statutory derivative action or the application for leave (s 247A(5)). Finally, the court has a discretion not to grant an order even though it may find that the application is made in good faith and for a proper purpose.2-2 The wording of s 247A indicates that the application must relate to books of the company of which the applicant is a member. The section cannot be used to inspect the books of a related company, meaning that s 247A has limited use in a corporate group. Gillooly gives the following example: Consider the common situation where a holding company conducts various businesses through wholly owned subsidiaries. Decisions that are crucial to the interests of members of the holding company will often be made at subsidiary level. Yet even if there are substantial grounds for suspecting that the subsidiary’s directors have breached their duties and irreparably damaged both the subsidiary and the holding company, members of the holding company will not be able to gain access to the records of the subsidiary through [s 247A]. The only eligible person to apply to the court is the holding company itself, with the decision to apply normally being made by the Board. If, as is usual within groups, the directors of the holding company and the subsidiary are common or associated, it is extremely unlikely that [s 247A] will be activated. 23 One rationale for restricting the right of inspection in pt 2F.3 is to protect the confidentiality of corporate information. Members, unlike directors of the corporation, owe no fiduciary duties of confidentiality to the company. Another reason is that the section reinforces the separation of powers between the general meeting and the board of directors. In Re Augold NL, Williams J stated that: ‘The creation of a statutory right to inspect company documents with the leave of the court should not, in my view, be regarded as affecting the basic rule of company law which has stood for many years that a shareholder would not ordinarily have recourse to the courts to challenge a managerial decision made by or with the approval of its directors.224 In addition to an application under s 247A, the Corporations Act contains other sections that provide access to corporate information. In particular:

* amember (indeed, any person) may inspect and copy any register which a company is required to keep under Corporations Act ch 2C (s 173). This includes
the register of members, of option-holders and of debenture-holders

* aperson may inspect and obtain a copy or extract of documents which are lodged with ASIC (s 1274; see also s 1274A). Certain documents are exempted
from this right of inspection—these are listed in s 1274(2). Individual shareholders face considerable obstacles in utilising their legislative rights to protect their interests and enforce their claims. They must contend with the financial costs of litigation, including court fees, professional fees and the potential of paying the other side's costs if the case is lost. There are problems in obtaining information on which to build a case (notwithstanding s 247A). There may be great difficulties in mobilising other shareholders to join or take an interest in the action, especially in companies with widely dispersed shareholdings. Furthermore, many shareholders are likely to be inexperienced or reluctant litigators; they are, in Marc Galanter’s well-known typology, ‘one-shotters’ in the litigation process.222 One solution to these obstacles is to use the class action procedure that is available under pt IVA of the Federal Court of Australia Act 1976 (Cth).22 This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 17 at Section 17.40.10. However, where shareholders are unable or unlikely to act, an alternative possibility is for ASIC to begin a civil action against wrongdoers in a company using the power under s 50 of the ASIC Act. As Ramsay notes, ASIC is often ‘in a superior position to shareholders to enforce corporate rights and duties’222 ASIC is, in Galanter’s terminology, a repeat player. In theory, this means that it has developed the necessary expertise and has access to specialist knowledge.2”8 It can enjoy economies of scale and lower start-up costs than an individual shareholder litigant. ASIC may also ‘play for the rules’ as well as for the outcome in a particular case. As Galanter explains, repeat players are able to take a longer-term, strategic view of litigation, looking for outcomes that will be favourable in future cases. Finally, ASIC's involvement as a litigant may ‘even up’ the contest, since many of the companies against which actions may be brought will also be repeat players. Under s 50 of the AS/C Act, where, as a result of an investigation or an examination, it appears to be in the public interest for a person to begin and carry ona proceeding, then ASIC may cause the proceeding to be begun and carried on in the person's name. The words ‘it appears to ASIC’ have been interpreted by the Federal Court as conferring ‘an extremely wide discretion’222 However, as emphasised in Somerville v Australian Securities Commission, {t]here must be a causative link between the investigation and the formation by the Commission of its view that it appears to be in the public interest for the proceeding to be begun and carried on’222 Note that s 50 only gives power to ASIC to commence proceedings; it does not permit ASIC to take over and continue proceedings that have already been commenced by a private litigant.221 The proceedings must either be aimed at recovering damages for fraud, negligence, default, breach of duty; or other misconduct committed in connection with the matter that was under investigation or examination; or at recovering property of the person in whose name the action is being carried. In Somerville v Australian Securities Commission, it was noted that the ‘[f]ruits of the litigation, if any, will benefit the person in whose name the proceeding has been brought, not the Commission’222 The Commission has explained its approach when deciding to exercise this power, noting the need to ‘direct finite resources appropriately’ and to be sure that’commencing and carrying on an action is in the broader public interest, beyond the private interests of the particular plaintiffs on whose behalf we commence the proceedings’223 In 2007, ASIC relied on its power under s 50 to bring actions seeking compensation for investors who lost over $300 million in the collapse of the Westpoint Group of property development companies in 2006.2*4 Overall, there have been very few cases where ASIC has exercised this power. Recall too that ASIC or a company damaged by the contravention of a civil penalty provision can apply for a compensation order under ss 1317H-HA (dis- cussed in Chapter 10 at Section 10.35.10). This chapter examined various mechanisms available to members to protect their rights or those of the company. This area of corporate law has come to be dominated by the statutory remedies, either because general law principles have been expressly overridden (as with the statutory derivative action), or because the available general law remedies are limited in scope. Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind that the principles and practices upon which modern statutory provisions have been built have their history in case law. This chapter examined the rule in Foss v Harbottle and its exceptions. It then moved on to examine six different sets of provisions in the Corporations Act and the ASIC Act that, in different ways, offer mechanisms for the protection of members’ rights: the remedy for oppressive or unfair conduct, the statutory derivative action, actions for winding up of a company, injunctions, opportunities for access to corporate information, and civil proceedings being commenced by ASIC. There are two points to note on the issue of the range of legal protections available to members and shareholders. First, the operation of these rules will be affected by the particular context in which they are raised. In this chapter, we have referred simply to‘members' or ‘shareholders. A moment's reflection reminds us there is no standard type of member or shareholder. Consider, for example, the difference between individual versus corporate or institutional shareholders, or between shareholders pursuing short-term investment gains versus long-term participation in a company’s business. Similarly, the company context plays a role in whether and when these legal protections come into play. This refers to differences between small proprietary companies and large publicly listed companies, and to companies whose shares are closely-held, or dominated by a single block shareholder, or that are widely-held by a diversity of shareholders. The second point is comparative. At a broad level, the Australian system of corporate law shares many features with other common law legal systems, especially the United Kingdom and the United States. Considered in more detail, differences emerge. Comparative study shows that the levels of shareholder protection, when judged by reference to the rules and remedies that are available, are stronger in Australia and the United Kingdom than in the United States. There are complex historical, economic and socio-political reasons that explain this, and they fall outside the scope of this book.222 QO) Loading. Please wait

1 In corporate law, the term ‘member’ includes the term’shareholder: In a company without share capital, we refer to‘the members: In a company with share capital, the terms ‘member’ and’‘shareholder’ can be used interchangeably. 2 Note that in this chapter we do not consider the situation where there is a contest between the interests of shareholders and those of the company's creditors, which can arise most clearly when a company is on the brink of insolvency. We deal with these issues in Chapters 15 and 16. 2 Parker v NRMA (1993) 11 ACSR 370, 383, 384.

4 In strict terms, this need not be a majority of shareholders. Remember that voting rights attach to shares and, as a consequence, a single shareholder with sufficient voting rights can out-vote a numerical majority of shareholders who, in total, hold a lesser number of votes. 3 North-West Transportation v Beatty (1887) 12 App Cas 589. See also Peters’ American Delicacy Co Ltd v Heath (1939) 61 CLR 457, 504 (Dixon J). § Gambotto v WCP Ltd (1995) 182 CLR 432, [28], [31] (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ) (‘Gambotto’s Case’). 2 Confirmed in Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (2016) 248 FCR 280. § Ngurli Ltd v McCann (1953) 90 CLR 425, 438 (Williams ACJ, Fullagar and Kitto JJ). The case usually cited as the original authority is Allen v Gold Reefs of West Africa Ltd [1900] 1 Ch 656. 2 See, eg, P Jahnke, ‘Ownership Concentration and Institutional Investors’ Governance Through Voice and Exit’ (2019) 21(3) Business and Politics 327. 19 For example, as of mid-2024, a shareholder class action was proceeding in the Victorian Supreme Court against the casino operator Crown Resorts Ltd, alleging that the company had made misleading or deceptive statements in relation to its compliance with the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006 (Cth). 1 The ideas of exit’ and ‘voice’ are taken from A Hirschman, Exit, Voice and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations and States (Harvard University Press, 1970). 12 Foss v Harbottle (1843) 67 ER 189. 13 See especially Mozley v Alston (1847) 1 Ph 790. 14 Burland v Earle [1902] AC 83, 93 (Lord Davey). See Foss v Harbottle (1843) 67 ER 189, 202; see also Edwards v Halliwell [1950] 2 All ER 1064, 1066. 13 Christianos v Aloridge Pty Ltd (1995) 58 FCR 273, 281 (Beaumont, Whitlam and Tamberlin JJ). 18 Edwards v Halliwell [1950] 2 All ER 1064, 1066 (Jenkins LJ). See al Loading. Please wait 12 Foss v Harbottle (1843) 67 ER 189, 202. — 18 MacDougall v Gardiner (1875) 1 Ch D 13, 25. 1° Wallersteiner v Moir (No 2) [1975] QB 373, 390.

20There is debate about whether these are best regarded as exceptions to the rule, or situations in which the rule has no application. An influential analysis is found in K Wedderburn, ‘Shareholders’ Rights and the Rule in Foss v Harbottle (1957) 15(2) Cambridge Law Journal 194. 21 See Russell v Wakefield Waterworks Co (1875) 20 LR Eq 474 and the cases cited therein. 22 See Edwards v Halliwell [1950] 2 All ER 1064 for an example of this exception. 23 For example, rights in relation to voting, dividend entitlements, pre-emption clauses, and participation in any surplus on winding up. 24 For example, rights in relation to the register of members (s 175; see Grant v John Grant & Sons Pty Ltd (1950) 82 CLR 1), rights to requisition meetings (s 249D), rights to demand a poll (ss 250K, 250L), and the right to receive a copy of the company’s annual financial report (s 314). There are many other examples throughout the Corporations Act. 25 Edwards v Halliwell [1950] 2 All ER 1064, 1067.

26 K Wedderburn, ‘Shareholders’ Rights and the Rule in Foss v Harbottle’ (1958) 16(1) Cambridge Law Journal 93, 93. 22 Vatcher v Paull [1915] AC 372, 378 (Parker LJ). 28 Daniels v Daniels [1978] Ch 406, 414 (Templeman J).

22 A classic example is found in Cook v Deeks [1916] 1 AC 554, 564 (Lord Buckmaster LC). 30 Ngurli Ltd v McCann (1953) 90 CLR 425. 31 Hogg v Cramphorn Ltd [1967] Ch 254; Bamford v Bamford [1970] Ch 212. 32 Winthrop Investments Ltd v Winns Ltd [1975] 2 NSWLR 666.

33 As a matter of procedure, these cases were argued as though the company was the defendant. This is because the minority shareholder, by definition, did not have the capacity to cause the company to bring the action. However, because the company had to be a party to the suit in order to be bound by the result it was joined as a defendant: see Spokes v Grosvenor Hotel Co [1897] 2 QB 124.
