# Chapter 12

Duties of good faith 12.05 Introduction
## 12.10.05 Introduction
## 12.10.10 The development of the duty
## 12.10.15 The first limb: meaning of ‘bona fide’
## 12.10.20 The first limb: meaning of ‘in the interests of the company’

## 12.10.25 The first lim!
lication to corporate groups

## 12.10.30 The first Ii ication to other stakeholders

## 12.10.35 The second limb: meaning of ‘for proper purposes’

## 12.10.40 The duty: a summary

## 12.10.45 Is the duty equitable or fiduciary? 12.15 The statutory duty

## 12.15.05 The coexistence of equity and statute

## 12.15.10 The statutory duty: a brief history

## 12.15.15 Section 181 of the Corporations Act 12.20 The duty not to fetter discretion 12.25 Summary OC) Loading. Please wait

Directors’ duties can be classified into two themes: duties in relation to care and skill, and duties in relation to loyalty and good faith. Chapter 10 provided an overview of the duties as a whole, and Chapter 11 provided the history and current law in relation to the duties of care and skill. This chapter is the first of two chapters addressing the duties of loyalty and good faith. These duties fall into two categories: those concerned with the way in which directors exercise the powers and discretions vested in them, and those concerned with the standard of conduct expected from directors. This chapter will focus on the first category, which includes the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes, its counterpart in s 181 of the Corporations Act, and the limitations on directors not to fetter the future exercise of their discretions. Chapter 13 will deal with the duties of loyalty and good faith that are concerned with the standard of conduct expected from directors, such as the fiduciary obligation of directors, officers and senior employees, the corresponding duties in ss 182-3, and the other Corporations Act duties around disclosure and management of conflicts. This chapter starts with a discussion of the general law in relation to the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes. The discussion examines how the law developed historically and how it exists today. It then considers s 181 of the Corporations Act, before moving to consider alternative approaches to this area of law, which demonstrate a development of the stakeholder approach to corporate theory.

## 12.10.05 Introduction

Within equity! there are relationships in which fiduciary obligations are owed, including the director-company relationship Fiduciary obligations impose higher standards of behaviour upon the parties than those imposed in arms-length relationships. The precise content of the fiduciary obligations? will be considered in Chapter 13, but for now, they can be summarised as the ‘no conflict’ and ‘no profit’ rules4 The duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company has a source in equity as a ‘duty of good faith’S Although historically, this duty has been characterised as fiduciary, it is unclear whether it can accurately be described as fiduciary in modern Australian law. This is important for the purposes of determining remedies and the liability of any third party who. assists in a breach or receives company property as a result of the breach.

## 12.10.10 The development of the duty

The duty to act bona fide and for proper purposes in relation to a power or discretion has a long history in equity. A precursor to the duty can be seen as far back as the sixteenth century, where the Lord Chancellor stated, in relation to a power granted in a will, that‘a person having a power, must execute it bona fide for the end designed, otherwise it is corrupt and void’ The language of the duty underwent a variety of formulations before settling into its current form. When applied to the director-company relationship, it is described as the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and for proper purposes. The terms ‘acting in good faith’ and ‘for proper purposes’ have been treated as one compound expression,Z as a duty containing two separate limbs,2 or without great distinction between the two. This approach is not followed in all jurisdictions. For example, in the United Kingdom and New Zealand, these terms could be considered as two separate duties. However, in this discussion we describe it as a single duty containing two limbs: to act bona fide in the best interest of the company, and to act for proper purposes. Both of these limbs must be satisfied in order for a director to comply with the duty under the general law. Although there is undoubtedly a close connection between the two concepts," they can be considered as distinct limbs.

## 12.10.15 The first limb: meaning of ‘bona fide’

In its early formulations, the first limb was described as a duty to act bona fide for the benefit of the company, or in the interests of the company as a whole.!2 It was also described as a duty to act honestly.42 Occasionally, the phrase ‘bona fide and for the benefit of the company’ was employed./4 By the mid-twentieth century, the courts settled on the description of the first limb of the duty as a duty to act ‘bona fide in the interests of the company’ This remains today. We consider below what’the interests of the company as a whole’ means. Before that, we must consider how to approach the term ‘bona fide: It could be interpreted as requiring the director to act honestly, in a subjective sense, or as imposing an objective requirement that the acts of the director are not distorted by some irregularity or impropriety. A wholly subjective test was applied in Re Smith & Fawcett Ltd, where the Court considered the application of the duty toa director's refusal to register a transfer of shares. The articles of the company, Smith & Fawcett Ltd, granted the directors an ‘absolute and uncontrolled discretion [to] refuse to register any transfer of shares. Mr Smith and Mr Fawcett each held 4,001 ordinary shares. Fawcett died, and bequeathed those shares to family members. When the family members applied to Smith to be registered as members of the company, Smith refused to register the transfer. Smith also made an offer to purchase some of the shares from Fawcett’s family. At first instance, an application to the Court to rectify the register of members was unsuccessful. On appeal, Lord Green MR for the Court of Appeal, held that the principles to be applied to the discretion conferred upon directors in cases such as these were clear: ‘[t]hey must exercise their discretion bona fide in what they consider—not what a Court may consider—is in the interests of the company, and not for any collateral purpose’!£ In much the same way as statutory interpretation insists on express words if the legislature intends to infringe upon common law rights, the Court held that a shareholder has’a prima facie right [to freely transfer their shares], and that right is not to be cut down by uncertain language or doubtful implications’ Lord Green continued: ‘The question, therefore, simply is whether on the true construction of the particular article the directors are limited by anything except their bona fide view as to the interests of the company ... It is said that on the evidence before us we ought to infer that the directors here were purporting to exercise their power to refuse a transfer not bona fide in the interests of the company but for some collateral ne a ee ee Bot ID This case dealt with the validity of a resolution of the members in a general meeting to authorise a lump sum payment to the directors after the company entered a scheme of arrangement which would divest its business to another company. The effect of the scheme was that directors and other officials would lose their positions once the divestment had occurred, and the resolution was packaged as compensation. The majority of the members passed a resolution authorising payment to the directors, but one of the dissenting minority members applied to the Court for an injunction restraining the payment. The plaintiff was granted the injunction at first instance because no meeting of the members had been properly called, but the primary judge indicated it was possible that if the meeting was duly called, the shareholders would have had the power to pass the proposed resolution.“ The plaintiff appealed, seeking to have that position clarified. While discussing the powers of the members, Bowen LJ said: [i]t is the money of the company, and the majority want to spend it. What would be the natural limit of their power to do so? They can only spend money which is not theirs but the company’s, if they are spending it for the purposes which are reasonably incidental to the carrying on of the business of the company. That is the general doctrine. Bona fides cannot be the sole test, otherwise you might have a lunatic conducting the affairs of the company, and paying away its money with both hands in a manner perfectly bona fide yet perfectly irrational. The test must be what is reasonably incidental to, and within the reasonable scope of carrying on, the business of the company2> In our view, it is better to rely on the other element of this first limb of the duty (the need to act in the interests of the company) and the second limb of the duty (the requirement to act for proper purposes) to catch behaviour described by Bowen LJ above.2° This was the pathway taken on appeal in the Bell Group litigation, so that ‘it matters not whether the director honestly believed that in exercising the power as he did he was acting in the interests of the company; the power having been exercised for an improper purpose, its exercise will be liable to be set aside’2” These requirements will be considered next.

## 12.10.20 The first limb: meaning of ‘in the interests of the company’

Although the company as an incorporated entity is a legal person in its own right, the ‘interests of the company’ have historically been equated with the interests of the members collectively. However, this does not preclude directors taking account of their own interests where they are also members. This issue was considered by the High Court in Mills v Mills,28 where the directors passed a resolution allocating the whole of the company’s reserve account to the ordinary shareholders by way of bonus shares; five bonus shares for every two ordinary shares held.22 The company had, prior to this resolution, 34,500 ordinary shares on issue, each carrying the right to one vote, and 11,500 preference shares, each carrying the right to three votes. One of the effects of this resolution, issuing 86,250 new ordinary shares, was that it increased the voting power of the managing director, Neilson Mills, who held predominantly ordinary shares. Neilson’s nephew, Ainslie, was a director and shareholder who held predominantly preference shares, a class to which bonus shares were not issued. Ainslie challenged the resolution as a breach of the director's duty to act bona fide in the best interest of the company. Ainslie voted against the resolution. A third director, who did not hold shares, voted with Neilson in favour of the share issue. The resolution took place immediately after Neilson had been pressured to resign as trustee of two trusts, which both held ordinary shares in the company, and through which Neilson had exercised a dominant voting position. This share issue had the effect of restoring the voting power that Neilson had lost through those resignations. At first instance, Lowe J in the Supreme Court of Victoria held that the scheme of distribution was arrived at honestly and voted for in the best interests of the company, and that the two directors supporting it were aware of the effect that the resolution would have in altering the voting power. On appeal, the High Court considered whether directors must act solely in the interests of the company to satisfy this duty. Latham CJ recognised that it is fairly common for directors to also be members of a company, and that this is considered desirable ‘so that their interests may be identified with those of the shareholders of the company’?! Latham CJ then observed: I do not read the general phrases which are to be found in the authorities with reference to the obligations of directors to act solely in the interests of the company as meaning that they are prohibited from acting in any matter where their own interests are affected by what they do in their capacity as directors. Very many actions of directors who are shareholders, perhaps all of them, have a direct or indirect relation to their own interests. It would be ignoring realities and creating impossibilities in the administration of companies to require that directors should not advert to or consider in any way the effect of a particular decision upon their own interests as shareholders. A rule which laid down such a principle would paralyse the management of companies in many directions. Accordingly, the judicial observations which suggest that directors should only consider the interests of the company and never their own interests should not be pressed to a limit which would create quite an impossible position 22 Latham CJ considered that, in a situation where there was a disagreement between the members as to what was in the interests of the company, the quesshares for every two ordinary shares held.22 The company had, prior to this resolution, 34,500 ordinary shares on issue, each carrying the right to one vote, and 11,500 preference shares, each carrying the right to three votes. One of the effects of this resolution, issuing 86,250 new ordinary shares, was that it increased the voting power of the managing director, Neilson Mills, who held predominantly ordinary shares. Neilson’s nephew, Ainslie, was a director and shareholder who held predominantly preference shares, a class to which bonus shares were not issued. Ainslie challenged the resolution as a breach of the director's duty to act bona fide in the best interest of the company. Ainslie voted against the resolution. A third director, who did not hold shares, voted with Neilson in favour of the share issue. The resolution took place immediately after Neilson had been pressured to resign as trustee of two trusts, which both held ordinary shares in the company, and through which Neilson had exercised a dominant voting position. This share issue had the effect of restoring the voting power that Neilson had lost through those resignations. Latham CJ considered that, in a situation where there was a disagreement between the members as to what was in the interests of the company, the question would not be‘a question of the interests of the company at all, but a question of what is fair as between different classes of shareholders’22 His Honour concluded that the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company had not been breached in this case24 More recently, Owen J at first instance in the Bell Group litigation held that:
there is no material difference, for present purposes, between the phrases ‘benefit of the company’, ‘best interests of the company’ and ‘interests of the company’ In the authorities they are often used interchangeably and, in my view, are all to the same broad effect 35 Further, his Honour stressed that the interests of the shareholders will be regarded as those of the company, particularly when questions as to directors’ duties arise in a solvent company, not because the shareholders are the company but because their interests intersect with the interests of the company in those circumstances. The idea that the interests of members correlate with the interests of the company has been confirmed in further High Court decisions.22 Acting in the best interests of the company has been taken to mean, on the one hand, that the directors are acting in the best interests of the members as a collective group; and, on the other hand, that the directors must have regard to the interests of present and future members, as well as the company as a commercial entity, even if this is not in the short-term best interests of the members.22 In light of more recent developments in relation to considerations of shareholder primacy, stakeholder theory and ‘enlightened shareholder value’ (to be discussed further at Section 12.15.20)4° in our view, the more inclusive and future-focused interpretation is to be preferred.

## 12.10.25 The first limb: application to corporate groups

Significant difficulties are faced by directors in complying with this duty where the company to whom the duty is owed is part of a larger corporate group.4t Questions arise as to whether or not a decision which is made with the interests of the group in mind can satisfy the requirement under this duty to act in the interests of the company. The general position is that directors must have primary regard to the interests of the particular company on whose board they sit, and not the wider group as a whole, even in instances of wholly owned subsidiaries. The High Court considered the application of duties to corporate groups in Walker v Wimborne®2 and confirmed that, because each company enjoys status as a separate legal entity, it is the duty of the directors to consider the interests of the individual company alone in deciding how to behave, even in circumstances of intra-group loans or financial decisions.“ Equally, apart from the legal status as separate entities, the ownership structure of the holding company and its subsidiaries may be vastly different, and so regard to the individual company must be a priority. The practical difficulties of the rule in Walker v Wimborne are evident when considering the decision of Equiticorp Finance Ltd (in liq) v Bank of New Zealand.“4 The Equiticorp group included companies in both Australia and New Zealand, and Mr Hawkins was a director of a number of the companies within the group. Hawkins was also described as Chairman or Chief Executive of the Equiticorp group. One company within the group had borrowed $200 million from the Bank of New Zealand to finance a takeover. When the Bank became concerned as to the size of its exposure, it placed pressure on Hawkins, who, in an effort to maintain good relations with this major creditor, used liquidity reserves from two other companies within the group, Equiticorp Financial Services Ltd (Aust) (‘Financial Services’) and Equiticorp Finance Ltd (‘Finance’), towards the debt owed to the Bank. When those companies went into liquidation, the liquidators challenged these payments to the Bank as having been made in breach of duty to Financial Services and Finance. At first instance, instead of relying solely on Walker v Wimborne, the Court applied the Charterbridge Corporation v Lloyds Bank“? test, which provides that, ina group situation, when it is clear that the directors have not had regard to the interests of the aggrieved company, the proper test is whether an ‘intelligent and honest' person in the position of a director of that company could, in the whole of the circumstances, reasonably have believed that the transactions were for the benefit of the company.“£ On appeal, the parties submitted that this test should also be applied by the Court. The majority, Clarke and Cripps JJA, were unconvinced, stating ‘[t]he directors are bound to exercise their powers, bona fide, in what they consider is in the interests of the company and not for any collateral purpose. Whether they did so or not is a question of fact/42 The majority noted the difficulties of aligning this factual question with the objective ‘intelligent and honest’ test set out in Charterbridge, confining that test to extremely limited circumstances, such as where’a director bluntly states that [they] did not consider the interests of the particular company at all and solely had regard to the interests of the group’“8 In the appeal decision in Westpac Banking Corporation v Bell Group Ltd (in liq) (No 3)42 which will be discussed below, Lee AJA agreed with this reservation expressed by the majority, stating that a ‘[b]reach of a duty not to act other than in the best interests of the company arises if the failure to consider the separate interests of the company produces a result that fails to meet the best interests of that to exercise their powers, bona fide, in what they consider is in the interests of the company and not for any collateral purpose. Whether they did so or not is a question of fact!42 The majority noted the difficulties of aligning this factual question with the objective ‘intelligent and honest’ test set out in Charterbridge, confining that test to extremely limited circumstances, such as where’a director bluntly states that [they] did not consider the interests of the particular company at all and solely had regard to the interests of the group’“8 In the appeal decision in Westpac Banking Corporation v Bell Group Ltd (in liq) (No 3),42 which will be discussed below, Lee AJA agreed with this reservation expressed by the majority, stating that a ‘[b]reach of a duty not to act other than in the best interests of the company arises if the failure to consider the separate interests of the company produces a result that fails to meet the best interests of that company... At that point there can be no requirement to consider what an intelligent and honest person would have done’=2 There is also guidance to be found for directors under s 187 of the Corporations Act, which will be discussed below, in relation to wholly owned subsidiaries.

## 12.10.30 The first limb: application to other stakeholders

‘The impacts of corporate decision-making on a wider range of interests than shareholders are now being given more recognition. The need to ensure protection of those interests also I think serves to explain why modern company courts have become more interventionist, in reviewing the activities of directors than was traditionally the case.2! The question of whose interests should be included in ‘the interests of the company’ is a long-standing one,=2 which has become more complex in light of modern theories justifying corporate behavior and regulation. One variant within the approaches to corporate purpose suggests that directors should not focus exclusively on achieving short-term profits for current members but should take a long-term approach to include ethical investments to yield returns for shareholders. In line with this argument is the notion that, in order to consider the interests of the company, directors must take a more broad view than the immediate interests of the current members, and should consider other stakeholders including creditors, employees, the environment, the community, and others. However, only in the limited circumstances that follow have the courts been willing to consider the ‘best interests of the company’ as extending beyond the traditional understanding of the interests of the members. Despite employees being significant stakeholders, directors do not have any specific positive duty to consider employees’ interests when making decisions for the company and, in fact, in cases where the employees’ interest conflict with those of the members, should not consider them. A famous quotation from Lord Bowen in Hutton v West Cork Railway Co, when considering the resolution to compensate employees who would lose their positions when the company was dissolved, states ‘[t]he law does not say that there are to be no cakes and ale, but there are to be no cakes and ale except such as are required for the benefit of the company’ This traditional approach was considered by the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs in 1989, which recommended that the Act be amended to provide that the interests of the employees may be taken into account by the directors.*° This recommendation was ‘The impacts of corporate decision-making on a wider range of interests than shareholders are now being given more recognition. The need to ensure protection of those interests also I think serves to explain why modern company courts have become more interventionist, in reviewing the activities of directors than was traditionally the case. Despite employees being significant stakeholders, directors do not have any specific positive duty to consider employees’ interests when making decisions for the company and, in fact, in cases where the employees’ interest conflict with those of the members, should not consider them. A famous quotation from Lord Bowen in Hutton v West Cork Railway Co, when considering the resolution to compensate employees who would lose their positions when the company was dissolved, states ‘[t]he law does not say that there are to be no cakes and ale, but there are to be no cakes and ale except such as are required for the benefit of the company’ This traditional approach was considered by the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs in 1989, which recommended that the Act be amended to provide that the interests of the employees may be taken into account by the directors.*° This recommendation was never implemented. Given the suggested phrasing of ‘may be taken into account; it is arguable that such an amendment would not, in any event, have been of significant use to an aggrieved employee. Similar criticisms have been levelled at the introduction of enlightened shareholder value into the Companies Act 2006 (UK), which is discussed in detail below.** However, there is judicial variation in the approach to employee interests across jurisdictions. While discussing the operation of the Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) in relation to a decision to outsource ground handling operations during the COVID-19 pandemic in Qantas v Transport Workers Union of Australia,=2 Gordon and Edelman JJ provide an example that failing to take into account the existence and terms of an enterprise agreement when making decisions about a company’s future might constitute a breach of s 181.28 A more active interpretation was taken in Canada in Teck Corporation Ltd v Millar>2 where the Court held that if a director was to ‘observe decent respect for other interests lying beyond those of the company’s shareholders in the strict sense’©°—such as, for example, the interests of the company’s employees—no one would argue that in doing so they were not acting bona fide in the interests of the company itself. Conversely, in the UK, it was held that a director who disregards the interests of the members in order to confer a benefit on employees or another stakeholder would be in breach of their duty.£! It would also be a breach of duty to disregard interests of the members in order to confer a benefit on a creditor if the company is considered to be solvent. Where the company is insolvent or nearing insolvency, there is a line of authority following Walker v Wimborne that suggests that, in discharging their duty to act in good faith in the interests of the company, the directors must have regard to the interests of creditors. This is due to the understanding that, near insolvency, the company’s focus shifts from maximising wealth for the members to seeking to prevent any further loss to the creditors. This is reflected in the ranking of creditors in insolvency, which will be considered in Chapter 16, and in the placement of members’ claims according to s 563A of the Corporations Act beneath all other creditor claimants. Members will wealth for the members to seeking to prevent any further loss to the creditors. This is reflected in the ranking of creditors in insolvency, which will be considered in Chapter 16, and in the placement of members’ claims according to s 563A of the Corporations Act beneath all other creditor claimants. Members will not receive any return in a company when its creditors cannot be paid in full. However, it is clear that outside of situations involving trading whilst insolvent (where creditors have a statutory power to pursue directors personally for the payment of debts),2 creditors have no standing to enforce the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and for proper purposes, as this duty is owed to the company. The company can enforce the duty itself or via a liquidator. The key consequence is that the members cannot ratify or release the directors from a breach of this duty in an insolvency context. Although this is not as significant as suggesting that the duty is owed to the creditors, it means that in decision-making when the company’s financial position is precarious, the interests of the company expand to encompass the interests of the creditors.©2 As the solvency of a company may be difficult to determine, this is an issue to which directors must remain alert, particularly if it alters the legal understanding of ‘the interests of the company’. This was considered by the Court in Kinsela v Russell Kinsela Pty Ltd (in liq).8 The Kinsela family operated a funeral home through the company Russell Kinsela Pty Ltd (‘the company’), which offered contributory insurance to cover the cost of a client's funeral services. Through this insurance, the company had built up a substantial commitment for the future provision of funeral services.£2 When the Funeral Funds Act 1979 (NSW) was passed, which had as its purpose to control and regulate such arrangements in the interests of the contributors, the Kinsela family became concerned due to the company’s significant exposure. The financial viability of the company was in doubt, as it had been running at a loss for a number of years with a substantial excess of liabilities over assets, in addition to these significant future obligations. The company was, eventually, put into liquidation. The primary judge had to consider a challenge by the liquidator in relation to a three-year lease entered into by the company as landlord, with Mr and Mrs Kinsela as tenants, at substantially below the market rental value, with no provision for escalation, with an option to purchase part of the premises at any time also at undervalue. The lease had been ratified by the members at a shareholder meeting, which was relied upon by the Kinselas as indicating ‘there could be no question of it not being in the best interests of the company or of it being a breach of fiduciary duty’2° Powell J at first instance felt ‘constrained by authority’ to agree that, if the lease had been authorised by all of the shareholders after receiving full disclosure, then the directors could not be found to be in breach of this duty. However, as one of the shareholders had not been fully informed, the consent of the shareholders was not complete and the lease was declared voidahle Z! The Kinselas challenaed that findina on anneal ‘constrained by authority’ to agree that, if the lease had been authorised by all of the shareholders after receiving full disclosure, then the directors could not be found to be in breach of this duty. However, as one of the shareholders had not been fully informed, the consent of the shareholders was not complete and the lease was declared voidable.2! The Kinselas challenged that finding on appeal. Street CJ, with whom Hope and McHugh JJA concurred, first considered whether the transaction was within the power of the company, and then, if it was, whether the power been validly exercised so as to bind the company. The Articles and Memorandum of this company were not drafted in such a way as to provide explicit powers to the directors. Indeed, it seemed to Street CJ that they had ‘the hallmarks of a “shelf” company’22 But, there did appear to be a power to enter into a lease, which led Street CJ to undertake a survey of the case law as to whether this power had been validly exercised, and whether it had been exercised in the interests of the company. His Honour held that the principles across the case law: were not intended to, and do not, apply in the situation in which the interests of the company as a whole involve the rights of creditors as distinct from the rights of shareholders. In a solvent company the proprietary interests of the shareholders entitle them as a general body to be regarded as the company when questions of the duty of directors arise. If, as a general body, they authorise or ratify a particular action of the directors, there can be no challenge to the validity of what the directors have done. But where a company is insolvent the interests of the creditors intrude. They become prospectively entitled, through the mechanism of liquidation, to displace the power of the shareholders and directors to deal with the company’s assets. It is in a practical sense their assets and not the shareholders’ assets that, through the medium of the company, are under the management of the directors pending either liquidation, return to solvency, or the imposition of some alternative administration 2 When considering the question of ratification, his Honour said that:

[w]here ... the interests at risk are those of creditors I see no reason in law or in logic to recognise that the shareholders can authorise the breach. Once it is accepted, as in my view it must be, that the directors’ duty to a company as a whole extends in an insolvency context to not prejudicing the interests of creditors the shareholders do not have the power or authority to absolve the directors from that breach.4 As the company was ‘plainly insolvent at the date of the lease, the prejudice to the creditor was a direct and calculated result of the company entering into the lease. The lease Street CJ, with whom Hope and McHugh JJA concurred, first considered whether the transaction was within the power of the company, and then, if it was, whether the power been validly exercised so as to bind the company. The Articles and Memorandum of this company were not drafted in such a way as to provide explicit powers to the directors. Indeed, it seemed to Street CJ that they had ‘the hallmarks of a “shelf” company’ But, there did appear to be a power to enter into a lease, which led Street CJ to undertake a survey of the case law as to whether this power had been validly exercised, and whether it had been exercised in the interests of the company. His Honour held that the principles across the case law: was entered into in breach of the directors’ duty to the company, in that it directly prejudiced the creditors of the company. The liquidator was entitled to seek it undone as a voidable transaction. > The application of this duty to an insolvent company was also considered in the Bell Group decisions. It was pleaded on behalf of the banks that the directors’ duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the companies included an obligation to act in the interests of creditors, present or future, of an insolvent company. Lee AJA addressed that pleading directly by reading it down ‘to be a pleading of a duty to act in the interests of an insolvent company by not causing the company to act to the prejudice of the interests of its creditors’2® The test becomes more complex where it is unclear whether or not the company is insolvent. In Kalls Enterprises Pty Ltd (in liq) v Baloglow, Giles JA said that ‘the company need not be insolvent at [the time when the particular decision under challenge is made] and the directors must consider [the creditors’] interests if there is a real and not remote risk that they will be prejudiced by the dealing in question’ This was considered in the United Kingdom by the Supreme Court in BT/ 2014 LLC v Sequana SA,28 which discounted the ‘real risk’ of insolvency test72 preferring that the directors know, or ought to know, that the company is insolvent or bordering on insolvency, or that insolvent external administration is probable.8° Once that is the case, Lady Ardern was prepared to extend the’creditor duty’ beyond mere consideration of the creditors’ interests, to a duty ‘not to materially harm them either’2! Although BT/ 2014 LLC v Sequana SA rejects the ‘real risk’ of insolvency trigger, which Keay notes has been accepted in a number of superior courts in Australia, the requirement to consider the interests of the creditors is now similar between the two jurisdictions, following that decision 22 The second limb of the duty—the requirement that directors exercise their powers for proper purposes—involves the consideration of two separate issues: the objective purpose for which a power was granted, and then the purpose for which a power was actually exercised. This limb has arisen for consideration by the courts, predominantly in the context of share issues. In public companies, this occurs where the company is the This limb has arisen for consideration by the courts, predominantly in the context of share issues. In public companies, this occurs where the company is the target of a hostile takeover? In proprietary companies, it is in the context of dilution of voting power of certain shareholders. Although these factual scenarios are dominant in the case law, the requirement to act for proper purposes does not only apply to the issue of shares but to all exercises of directors’ discretions and powers. The requirement that directors exercise their powers and discretions for proper purposes originates in the idea of ‘fraud on the power’—a legal principle extending beyond corporate law into any instrument which grants a power. Vatcher v Paull® was a case considering a power of appointment contained ina marriage settlement rather than the power reposed in a director either by the constitution or the relevant legislation. However, Lord Parker of Waddington (delivering the judgment for the Privy Council) stated that: [t]he term fraud in connection with frauds on a power does not necessarily denote any conduct on the part of the appointor amounting to fraud in the common law meaning of the term or any conduct which could be properly termed dishonest or immoral. It merely means that the power has been exercised for a purpose, or with an intention, beyond the scope of or not justified by the instrument creating the power. There has been some movement over time on the question of whether ‘proper purposes’ should be considered a separate limb to‘bona fide in the interests of the company’, due to the close connection between the two.* In Re Smith & Fawcett Ltd, the duty was expressed as being that directors ‘exercise their discretion bona fide in what they consider—not what a court may consider—is in the interests of the company, and not for any collateral purpose’22 In Harlowe’s Nominees Pty Ltd v Woodside (Lakes Entrance) Oil Co NL (‘Harlowe’s Case’)28 Harlowe sought a declaration that the issue by the directors of nine million shares in Woodside to another company (Burmah) was void. Woodside and Burmah worked in collaboration in their explorations for oil and natural gas in south eastern Victoria prior to the allotment, which took place following Harlowe making significant on-market purchases of shares in Woodside. The High Court acknowledged that if the share purchasing by Harlowe ‘was to effect changes in the control of Woodside its hopes were seriously prejudiced, if not destroyed, by the allotment to Burmah’22 Harlowe argued that Woodside had no immediate need for the additional share capital introduced via the share issue, and that the directors engaged in the share issue for the irrelevant and inadmissible purpose of preventing Harlowe from obtaining the voting power it had expected to obtain or, at least, without duly considering whether or not the making of the issue was truly in the interests of their company as a whole. af tha The Court did not clearly distinguish between the two limbs. It commenced with a consideration of the impermissible purpose but concludes with considerations of the interests of the company. However, the weight of Harlowe’s argument was based primarily on the question of the purpose for which the shares were issued, with an argument in the alternative that the issue was not in the interests of the company as a whole. As there were a variety of benefits to the company readily perceived by the share issue, such as an increase in capital and strengthening their ties with Burmah, this argument was not likely to succeed. The Court considered that if the directors exercised their judgment in good faith and not for irrelevant purposes, then their decision was not open for review, even if it had the practical consequence of frustrating Harlowe's ambitions, and even if the directors realised that would be the result and found it agreeable.22 The purpose would become improper if, in making the allotment, the directors had an actual purpose of thereby creating an advantage for themselves otherwise than as members of the general body of shareholders, as for instance by buttressing their directorships against an apprehended attack from such as Harlowe, the allotment would plainly be voidable.2 This raises the additional question of the test for determining the purpose for which a power or discretion has actually been exercised. The majority of cases concerning the exercise of power ‘for a proper purpose’ are in relation to the issue of shares, and there is significant authority from the courts as to the objective purpose for which the power to issue shares is granted. The typical purpose behind the power to issue shares is to raise capital 24 However, the courts have also considered other purposes. As discussed in Harlowe’s Case, the capital raised through the share allotment was not immediately required by Woodside,2> but ‘the purpose of putting Woodside in a position of vastly greater freedom to plan for increasing participation with its “partner”, Burmah, in the activities for which hopes in many quarters were running high’ was perceived as a proper purpose by the courts. Other cases suggest that issuing shares to ensure a sufficient minimum number of shareholders to comply with statutory requirements would be a proper purpose.2 In contrast, attempting to defeat a hostile takeover, facilitating a takeover through the reduction of an existing majority or creation of anew majority,2* and entrenching control in one group of shareholders at the expense of another! have been held to be improper purposes. It is possible that a company’s constitution may expressly state permissible purposes for the use of a power, as discussed in Whitehouse v Carlton! below. However, a broad conferral ofall the powers of the directors’ onto one director while he remains permanent governing director was not sufficient to demonstrate intention for the director to be free of any restraint upon the exercise of the powers.102 These cases demonstrate it is possible to have multiple purposes for the exercise of a power. The courts have put forward different legal tests for determining the situation where directors’ actions are motivated by a combination of proper and improper purposes. Does the mere presence of an improper purpose invalidate the exercise of power? We consider two different approaches below, before turning to Darvall v North Sydney Brick & Tile Co Ltd,1°2 which provides a method for reconciling the tests. Howard Smith Ltd v Ampol Petroleum Ltd! concerned an allotment of shares by the directors of a company, RW Miller Holdings Ltd (‘Millers’), to Howard Smith during a takeover contest for Millers between Ampol and Howard Smith.1°5 Ampol made a formal offer for the issued shares in Millers, which the board of Millers recommended be rejected by shareholders as being too low. When Howard Smith announced an intention to make a higher offer, Ampol and another company, Bulkships, who between them held just under 55 per cent of Millers’ shares, released a press statement indicating that they would act jointly to reject any offer for their shares by Howard Smith or any other source. At the same time, Millers required finance of $10 million in relation to an ongoing project and to secure its financial position. Phrasing the action as protection of the interests of minority members of Howard Smith, who could not accept any offer for their shares on the basis that Ampol and Bulkships would reject it, Millers allotted 4.5 million $1 ordinary shares to Howard Smith in exchange for $2.30 per share, totalling $10.35 million. After the allotment, Ampol and Bulkships no longer held more than 50 per cent of the shareholding in Millers. Street CJ found that the directors had ‘issued the shares so as to reduce the interest of these two shareholders to something significantly less than that of a majority, despite evidence given by some of the directors that capital raising had been the motivator for the share issue. While capital raising ‘was the immediate purpose; ‘the ultimate purpose was to procure the continuation by Howard Smith of the takeover offer made by that company’ The Privy Council agreed with this finding that the sole purpose of the share issue was to ‘destroy an existing majority, or create a new majority which did not previously exist’, and, as such, was invalid.1°8 Their Lordships discussed the test to be applied if the proper purpose of capital raising existed alongside the improper purpose. After ascertaining the nature of the power to issue shares, the Court indicated in obiter that, ‘it is then necessary for the court ... to examine the substantial purpose for which it was improper purposes. It is possible that a company’s constitution may expressly state permissible purposes for the use of a power, as discussed in Whitehouse v Carlton! below. However, a broad conferral of ‘all the powers of the directors’ onto one director while he remains permanent governing director was not sufficient to demonstrate intention for the director to be free of any restraint upon the exercise of the powers.102 exercised, and to reach a conclusion whether that purpose was proper or not’22 This is now recognised as the ‘substantial purpose’ test. In contrast, the Court in Whitehouse v Carlton Hotel Pty Ltd! preferred a ‘but for’ test, which can be seen in the reasoning of Dixon J in the High Court in Mills v Mills discussed above." Charles Whitehouse was the permanent governing director of Carlton Hotel Pty Ltd, holding two A-class shares in the company, which carried unrestricted voting rights. His ex-wife held two B-class shares, which carried full voting rights after the death of Charles, but only if still held by his ex-wife. In addition, there were 6,400 C-class shares held by their children, which carried no voting rights at all, but rights to share in profits and surplus capital. Due to familial discord during the dissolution of the Whitehouse’s marriage, Charles issued two B-class shares to his sons, to prevent his ex-wife from gaining control over the voting power in the general meeting after his death. The shares were issued by Charles, but without a meeting of the directors or a resolution of the board to allot the B-class shares.!2 Charles later fell out with his sons, and at a directors’ meeting only attended by himself and a Mrs J Whitehouse,1? resolved that the B-class shares had not been allotted to the sons and directed that the share register be amended. The sons sued to seek correction of the share register, reinstating their names as B-class shareholders. They were successful at first instance, but overturned on appeal, and were granted leave to appeal to the High Court. As with Howard Smith Ltd v Ampol Petroleum Ltd, the Court found that the allotment was made solely for the purpose of manipulating the voting power of the shareholders but discussed in obiter the relevant test to be applied when more than one purpose exists. The majority acknowledged that ‘the preponderant view’ of the legal test was whether the impermissible purpose was the dominant or substantial object of the exercise of the power4 Their Honours then stated that: ‘Asa matter of logic and principle, the preferable view would seem to be that, regardless of whether the impermissible purpose was the dominant one or but one of a number of significantly contributing causes, the allotment will be invalidated if the impermissible purpose was causative in the sense that, but for its presence, ‘the power would not have been exercised. These two approaches have similar themes. Even under the ‘but for’ test, the impermissible purpose must have been a‘significantly contributing’ cause for the directors’ actions to be rendered impermissible. The two tests were reconciled in Darvall v North Sydney exercised, and to reach a conclusion whether that purpose was proper or not’222 This is now recognised as the’substantial purpose’ test. As with Howard Smith Ltd v Ampol Petroleum Ltd, the Court found that the allotment was made solely for the purpose of manipulating the voting power of the shareholders but discussed in obiter the relevant test to be applied when more than one purpose exists. The majority acknowledged that ‘the preponderant view’ of the legal test was whether the impermissible purpose was the dominant or substantial object of the exercise of the power.4 Their Honours then stated that: Brick & Tile Co Ltd,“* where, although entry into a joint venture agreement was prompted by concerns about a takeover offer, the directors had other reasons for contemplating the joint venture, including providing shareholders with an alternative to the takeover offer and advancing the commercial position of the company.” Clarke JA noted that’the bald proposition that it is improper to take action to defeat a take-over offer is too widely stated to constitute a legal principle’"8 It could not be correct to say that any action taken which may lead to the defeat of a takeover is necessarily improper, as any commercial decision reached where a takeover has been mooted might fall foul of the proper purposes limb of the duty.12

## 12.10.40 The duty: a summary

To summarise, it is accepted that satisfying the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes involves subjective and objective elements. More recent cases have focused on whether the directors believe they are acting in the best interests of the company, rather than deliberately engaging in conduct knowing it is not in the best interests of the company.!2° The better view is that the test as to whether the director was acting bona fide in the best interests of the company is subjective. It may be tempered with questions of reasonableness, but as an objective threshold is applied to the second limb, it may not be necessary within the first limb. Acting in the best interests of the company has been taken to mean, on the one hand, that the directors are acting in the best interests of the members as a collective group;/2! and on the other hand, that the directors must have regard to the interests of present and future members, as well as the company as a commercial entity, even if this is not in the short-term best interests of the members.122 The second limb of the duty—the requirement that directors exercise their powers for proper purposes—involves the consideration of two separate issues: the objective purpose for which the power was granted, and the purpose for which the power was actually exercised.123 Honest or altruistic behaviour will not prevent a finding of improper conduct if that conduct was carried out for an improper or collateral purpose. As directors may be motivated by a number of purposes, the court will consider whether the motivating purpose is improper. Two tests have been proposed: the ‘but for’ test from Whitehouse v Carlton Hotel Pty Ltd,12* and the substantial or dominant purpose test from Mills v Mills: 228

## 12.10.40 The duty: a summary

The following test appears to satisfy both requirements. It asks whether the improper purpose was a significant contributing cause to the exercise of the power, and, but for its presence, the power would not have been exercised. If so, then the duty will have been breached.

## 12.10.45 Is the duty equitable or fiduciary?

For the purposes of determining the available remedies in the general law, it is important to understand whether the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company can be correctly described as ‘fiduciary’ in nature. If it is fiduciary, then a breach could potentially entitle the company to seek compensation from any third party who knowingly received fiduciary property or knowingly assisted the director to breach their duty.122 Following the decision of the High Court in Breen v Williams, there is doubt whether this duty can be accurately described as fiduciary, as the duty requires a director to take positive action, which falls outside the High Court's contemplation of the fiduciary obligation.128 Fiduciary obligations were, in that decision, confined to proscriptive duties only; that is, the Court held that the fiduciary obligation contained prohibitive or negative duties, which require the fiduciary not to act in a certain way, rather than prescriptive or positive duties, which require positive action from the fiduciary. This question, and the ability to access remedies against third parties, was at the heart of the litigation in the Bell Group cases.122 The Bell Group of companies had a high profile in Australia in the 1970s and 1980s and was the subject of a takeover by Bond Corporation in 1988. At that time, the Bell Group was highly geared, owing significant unsecured debt borrowings to a number of banks. In 1989, it became apparent to the directors and the major bank creditors that the Group was potentially insolvent. A refinancing arrangement was negotiated, with the banks providing no further finance but requiring the Bell Group to provide security and guarantees and subordinate intra-group debt. The key company within the group, Bell Group Ltd, went into liquidation in April 1991, and the banks recovered $283 million by realising the securities they had gained under the refinancing arrangement. In 1995, the liquidator and various creditors took action against the banks on the basis that the refinancing arrangement involved a breach of duties by the Bell Group Ltd directors, including the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes. In particular, the liquidator argued that the banks knew that the directors’ approval of the refinancing arrangement was a breach of their fiduciary obligations, and as such, the banks were liable for knowing assistance and knowing receipt under Barnes v Addy.12° At first instance, Owen J found that the directors did not believe that the refinancing arrangements were in the best interests of each company in the Bell Group as a whole, taking into account the creditors, future

## 12.10.45 Is the duty equitable or fiduciary?
believe that the refinancing arrangements were in the best interests of each company in the Bell Group as a whole, taking into account the creditors, future creditors and members, and that they had entered into the transactions for improper purposes.1! Further, Owen J held that the banks had notice of the directors’ breaches, that these duties were fiduciary, and that the banks were liable as third parties who had knowingly received property as a result of a breach of fiduciary obligations.122 When discussing the question of whether or not a positive obligation could be classified as fiduciary, Owen J commenced by stating that:33 Where a person has undertaken to act in the interests of another and where the nature of that relationship, its surrounding circumstances and the obligations attaching to it so require, it will be held to be fiduciary. But the fact that it is categorised as fiduciary does not mean that all of the obligations arising from it are themselves fiduciary. Unless there are some special circumstances in the relationship, the duties that equity demands from the fiduciary will be limited to what I have described as the core obligations: not to obtain any unauthorised benefit from the relationship and not to be in a position of conflict. They stem from the fundamental obligation of loyalty. His Honour then undertook a history of the duty and found on the basis of obiter discussion that the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes is a fiduciary obligation./24 His Honour did not consider that Breen v Williams overruled these authorities, because it did not apply generally or it did not hold that only proscriptive duties could be fiduciary.25 On appeal, the majority upheld Owen J’s conclusions as to a breach of directors’ fiduciary duties and third-party liability via Barnes v Addy; although their Honours’ reasoning in relation to the duty was different to that of Owen J132 The requirements of the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes are relevant to the prohibition on a fiduciary placing themselves in a position of conflict. This is not enough to classify the duty itself as fiduciary. Debate continues as to whether the particular intention of the Court in Breen wv MWiilliame wac ta canfine fiduciary abliaatiane ta nenccrintive diitiac aniv 141 The matter hac nat haan concidarad at the hichact annallate lavale cinca the His Honour then undertook a history of the duty and found on the basis of obiter discussion that the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes is a fiduciary obligation./24 His Honour did not consider that Breen v Williams overruled these authorities, because it did not apply generally or it did not hold that only proscriptive duties could be fiduciary.45 On appeal, the majority upheld Owen J’s conclusions as to a breach of directors’ fiduciary duties and third-party liability via Barnes v Addy, although their Honours’ reasoning in relation to the duty was different to that of Owen J.32 The Bell Group litigation was settled by the parties in the same month that the scheduled appeal was to be heard in the High Court,8 leaving the position in Breen v Williams'32 unchanged at the highest level of Australian authority.42 The requirements of the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes are relevant to the prohibition on a fiduciary placing themselves in a position of conflict. This is not enough to classify the duty itself as fiduciary. Debate continues as to whether the particular intention of the Court in Breen v Williams was to confine fiduciary obligations to proscriptive duties only.4' The matter has not been considered at the highest appellate levels since the 1980s. In the Explanatory Memorandum which accompanied the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998 (Cth), s 181 was stated ‘to mirror the fiduciary duty of a director to act in what they believe to be in the best interests of the corporation and for proper purposes’/“2 The more recent decisions of the intermediate courts suggest that the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company requires positive steps. This could either indicate a departure from the position that this duty can be classified as fiduciary, or demonstrate that, when applied within corporate law, this duty has diverged from the mainstream of fiduciary law. A number of intermediate court decisions have recognised the duty as being fiduciary in nature,1? which is the position taken now in the United Kingdom, but until the High Court clarifies or overrules the position established in Breen v Williams, this remains unsettled in Australia.144

## 12.15.05 The coexistence of equity and statute

Section 185 of the Corporations Act preserves the operation of the general law duties, including the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and for proper purposes, alongside the legislative duties. This is important for a company whose directors have breached their duties, but where ASIC is not in a position to investigate or take action under the civil penalty provisions. ASIC is the only party who can seek a declaration of contravention, or the disqualification of a director, or a pecuniary penalty order.!* This does not prevent a company from claiming that directors have breached the provisions of the Act; it only prevents them from seeking those penalties available exclusively to ASIC under the civil penalty provisions, such as disqualification or pecuniary penalty orders. The company is entitled to seek a compensation order under s 1317H.148 This is made clear in s 1317J, which notes that ‘an application for a compensation order may be made whether or not a declaration of contravention has been made under section 1317E! The company may seek compensation by intervening in an application by ASIC, under s 1317J(3), or in an action on its own behalf under s 1317J(2). Although the scope for compensation under s 1317H appears quite generous, seeming to mirror the equitable remedy of account of profits in s 1317H(2), a company may still wish to bring an action for breach of the equitable duty and the statutory duty in the alternative. The company would not be allowed to be compensated twice, and so would need to elect their preferred remedial alternative.

## 12.15.10 The statutory duty: a brief history

A statutory version of the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and for proper purposes was first enacted in s 107 of the Companies Act 1958 (Vic)““2 to this effect: A director shall at all times act honestly and use reasonable diligence in the discharge of the duties of his office. The duty includes an element from the duty of care, skill and diligence, discussed in Chapter 11. In Marchesi v Barnes (‘Marchesi’),!48 Gowans J suggested that the language used in the statutory enactment originated in Re Smith & Fawcett Ltd:’[t]hey must exercise their discretion bona fide in what they consider—not what a Court may consider—is in the interests of the company, and not for any collateral purpose‘!42 Gowans J stated that, under the language of that provision, to ‘act honestly’ refers to acting bona fide in the interests of the company in the performance of the functions attaching to the office of director. A breach of the obligation to act bona fide in the interests of the company involves a consciousness that what is being done is not in the interests of the company, and deliberate conduct in disregard of that knowledge? The duty in the Corporations Act was the result of the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Act 1999 (Cth) (‘CLERP Act’). When the Corporations Act was introduced, the relevant section mirrored s 181(1) of the CLERP Act and this remains so in the current version of the legislation.

## 12.15.15 Section 181 of the Corporations Act

The duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and for proper purposes under s 181 of the Corporations Act bears striking resemblance to the language discussed above in relation to the duty in equity. Section 181(1) states that: Adirector or other officer of a corporation must exercise their powers and discharge their duties: (a) in good faith in the best interests of the corporation; and (b) for a proper purpose.

The only visible alterations in the section from the preceding discussion are the use of the phrase ‘good faith’ instead of bona fide, the insertion of the word ‘best’in relation to accountability of management to the shareholders, prioritise profit maximisation for the shareholders as the primary corporate concern. Broadly, it can mean that the focus of the ‘best interests of the company’ should be on the shareholders, as a general body, which could encompass both current and future shareholders. Theories about corporate purpose, as discussed in Chapter 2, include recognition of corporate social responsibility, and its more recent iteration particularly in relation to corporate investing as ‘environmental, social and governance’ matters.52 The impact of these theories in relation to directors’ duties, particularly the role of corporate purpose and the influence of stakeholders, was considered in the 2006 report of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Corporate Responsibility: Managing Risk and Creating Value=8 The report found that the current duty ‘permits directors to have regard to the interests of stakeholders other than shareholders’1*2 It recommended that no further alteration to the statutory duty was required. In support of this recommendation, the report gave examples of behaviour classified as responsible corporate behaviour already taking place under the current provisions, such as maintaining and improving company reputation or good will, and attracting investment from ethical investment funds.‘ However, as discussed at Section 2.45.05, the UK has taken a different approach to encourage directors to engage with wider stakeholder interests under their duty to act in good faith in the best interests of the company and for a proper purpose. In the UK, corporate social responsibility arguments have been given some statutory recognition under the label of ‘enlightened shareholder value’ (‘ESV’)1S1 Section 172 of the Companies Act 2006 (UK) provides that: (b) the interests of the company’s employees,

The phrasing of the statute retains the interests of the company’s shareholders as paramount but explicitly permits the directors to consider other interests. The inclusion of ESV in s 172 creates a duty to mirror the discretion alluded to by Lord Bowen in Hutton v West Cork Railway Co that ‘there are to be no cakes and ale except such as are required for the benefit of the company‘ In Australia, it has been accepted that s 181(1) of the Corporations Act implicitly permits consideration of other interests, as long as they align with the ‘interests of the company’ When s 172 was considered by the Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee in 2006, the provision was described as exemplifying the ‘elaborated shareholder benefit approach’ by providing a broader context for directors in fulfilling the primary duty to the company.1©3 The ESV approach was put forward by the UK Company Law Review Steering Group in 1999.1 In line with the reform objectives of the review, the Group sought reforms to ‘achieve competitiveness and efficient creation of wealth and other benefits for all participants in the enterprise, as well as ‘minimise the negative impacts of corporate activity on participants and to maximise welfare more widely’1® In relation to directors and companies, the Group perceived ESV as a remedy to the exclusive focus on the short-term financial bottom line, in the erroneous belief that this equates to shareholder value, which will often be incompatible with the cultivation of co-operative relationships, which are likely to involve short-term costs but to bring greater benefits in the longer term.16¢ The Group sought comments on whether the present law requiring directors to have regard to the interests of the shareholders as a whole should be amended to insert ‘additional declaratory clarification’ that directors could take account of other external factors.192 The reform in s 172 has been subject to criticism. On the one hand, ‘falll it requires is that the director should think about’ interests beyond those of the members;!68 and, on the other hand, ‘the vague nature of ESV principles and uncertainty surrounding the ability to recover substantial sums for breach of ESV principles make it unlikely that the statutory statement will represent any substantive advance on the common law position’!®2 However, s 172’s role as an incremental step towards a broader understanding of the ‘interests of the company’ was acknowledged by a member of the Group, who stated that: The phrasing of the statute retains the interests of the company’s shareholders as paramount but explicitly permits the directors to consider other interests. The inclusion of ESV in s 172 creates a duty to mirror the discretion alluded to by Lord Bowen in Hutton v West Cork Railway Co that ‘there are to be no cakes and ale except such as are required for the benefit of the company‘2®2 In Australia, it has been accepted that s 181(1) of the Corporations Act implicitly permits consideration of other interests, as long as they align with the ‘interests of the company’ When s 172 was considered by the Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee in 2006, the provision was described as exemplifying the ‘elaborated shareholder benefit approach’ by providing a broader context for directors in fulfilling the primary duty to the company. ‘The interests of non-shareholder groups thus need to be considered by the directors, but, of course, in this shareholder-centred approach, only to the extent that the protection of those other interests promotes the interest of the shareholders The incorporation of stakeholder interests has been considered within Australian corporate law reform on a number of occasions. The Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs concluded in 1989 that stakeholder interests were best covered by specific legislation dealing with industrial relations, trade practices, and consumer and environmental protection! The Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee in 2006 considered s 172 and set forward a number of positions: On one view, adopting the directors’ duties provision in the UK Act in the Corporations Act may be unnecessary if it is designed merely to codify the current common law, as reflected in s 181 of the Corporations Act. Alternatively, this provision could result in a radical change from traditional company law, if interpreted in the Australian context as some form of general departure from the current obligations of directors in s 181 to act in the best interests of the shareholders generally. Arguably, it could also entrench in legislation particular stakeholder and other criteria that, while possibly reflecting current concerns, may not necessarily be appropriate for corporate decision-making in the future12 The first is a valid criticism on the drafting of s 172(1). The current Australian law permits consideration of creditors, employees and wider concerns while they are consistent with the interests of the company./22 The second criticism does not seem well-founded in light of what has occurred in the years following the enactment of s 172. For example, in R (on the Application of People & Planet) v HM Treasury;“4 the Court refused an application for judicial review of a policy adopted by HM Treasury in relation to its investment in the Royal Bank of Scotland (‘RBS’). The applicant argued that HM Treasury failed to properly consider under s 172 the environmental and human rights implications of the policy. The Court refused the application on the basis that, although social and environmental considerations may be taken into account by the directors of RBS in the context of s 172, HM Treasury seeking to impose its own policy on climate change or human rights would conflict with the duties of the RBS board under s 172(1).122 The duty to the shareholders remained paramount, and the other stakeholder interests mentioned in s 172 needed only to be considered. The third criticism is hardly unique to corporate law, as any legislation will be reflective of the interests of the time when it is enacted and may require amendment in the future as society develops. The criticism that ‘a non-exhaustive cataloque of interests to be taken into account serves little useful purpose be incompatible with the cultivation of co-operative relationships, which are likely to involve short-term costs but to bring greater benefits in the longer term.16¢ The incorporation of stakeholder interests has been considered within Australian corporate law reform on a number of occasions. The Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs concluded in 1989 that stakeholder interests were best covered by specific legislation dealing with industrial relations, trade practices, and consumer and environmental protection.2! The Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee in 2006 considered s 172 and set forward a number of positions: The third criticism is hardly unique to corporate law, as any legislation will be reflective of the interests of the time when it is enacted and may require amendment in the future as society develops. The criticism that ‘a non-exhaustive catalogue of interests to be taken into account serves little useful purpose for directors and affords them no guidance on how various interests are to be weighed, prioritised or reconciled’!“£ is most valid, and remains a hurdle to similar provisions being implemented under Australian law22Z O Loading. Please wait

Another aspect of the duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes is that a director must retain their independent discretion in order to satisfy the duty. For example, agreeing to vote at board meetings according to the directions of another person would be an inappropriate fettering of discretion.128 Although this duty can be traced back to cases in the 1800s,1”° it has been judicially lamented that there are not many cases expressing the principle.18° The duty prohibits directors from inappropriately binding the future exercise of their discretionary powers, or from delegating them, except as permitted by the constitution or the Corporations Act. The question as to when it may be appropriate to bind a future exercise of discretion was considered by the High Court in Thorby v Goldberg, although primarily through the lens of contract law.8! A company, Medical-Dental Building Pty Ltd, was to be formed by a number of shareholders, described as the‘O Group; some of whom would go on to be the initial directors, in order to develop a block of land into a multi-storey building of professional suites, shops and offices. The O Group entered into a contract with the plaintiffs, who were described in the contract as the ‘G Group; to inject capital into the project, in exchange for a number of future conditions, including occupancy of part of the new building. The contract was later challenged on the grounds of illegality, due to two clauses which required the O Group to cause a meeting of the directors to allot shares to the G Group (which presupposed an alteration to the company’s articles had occurred) and then, at that meeting, for three directors to resign and two members of the G Group to be appointed as directors. There was also a variety of other contractual arguments raised, but the argument as to illegality was that as every exercise of the directors’ discretionary powers is required to be in good faith for the benefit of the company as a whole, an agreement that the directors purport to fetter their discretions in advance is contrary to the policy of the law and void.182 Kitto J continued:

‘There are many kinds of transactions in which the proper time for the exercise of the directors’ discretion is the time of the negotiation of a contract, and not the time at which the contract is to be performed. A sale of land is a familiar example. Where all the members of a company desire to enter as a group into a transaction such as that in the present case, the transaction being one which requires action by the board of directors for its effectuation, it seems to me that the proper time for the directors to decide whether their proposed action would in the interests of the company as a whole is the time when the transaction is being entered into, and not the time when their action under it is required. If at the former time they are bona fide of the opinion that it is in the interests of the company that the transaction should be entered into and carried into effect, I see no reason in law why they should not bind themselves to do whatever under the transaction is to be done by the board. In my opinion the defendants’ contention that the agreement is void for illegality should be rejected.183 As such, as long as the directors considered at the appropriate time—which, in that case, was the time of entering into the contract—that the undertakings were bona fide in the best interests of the company and for proper purposes, this future fettering of their discretions would not be inappropriate. The context of the undertakings is also relevant. Thorby involved a limited arrangement, where the directors had given consideration as to whether it was in the best interests of the company prior to entry into the transaction. By contrast, a more expansive fettering of discretion, where directors were required to limit their discretion as to’all activities of the company’ and ‘control of the company’ remitting another party to be ‘the sole decisions maker for all business associated with the company; without any qualification or proviso, consequently prevented directors from giving consideration to, or exercising their discretion, in the interest of the company.184 Nominee directors, who are appointed by a special interest group such as a class of shareholders, a major creditor or the company’s employees, may be most at risk under this duty.!25 These directors must take particular care in relation to how they represent the interests of their appointor group, while performing their role as a director, in order not to inappropriately fetter their discretion. This chapter is the first of two chapters addressing the duties of loyalty and good faith. It focuses on the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and for proper purposes, and its counterpart under s 181(1) of the Corporations Act. We traced the development of the duty from its equitable roots, in doctrines relating to the exercise of a power bona fide for the reason for which it was granted, to considerations of the structure of the duty under the general law and in s 181(1), before settling into its current form with two limbs, both of which must be satisfied for the director to be compliant. The first limb—the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company—contains two elements. The first, the bona fides of the director, is accepted as a subjective test, considering the behaviour of the director in question. Some decisions have included an objective understanding of the circumstances in which the director exercised their power; it is better to consider objective considerations in the second limb of the duty. The second element—the interests of the company—is traditionally equated with the interests of the members collectively. This raises significant difficulties for directors, faced with complex, interlocking corporate groups, where the directors may also validly consider the benefit to the group. Other stakeholders may be considered, but only as long as their interests align with the interests of the company. This applies to companies approaching insolvency, where the directors must have regard to the interests of the creditors. The second limb of the duty—the requirement to exercise their powers and discharge their duties for a proper purpose—requires consideration of two questions: What is the objective purpose for which the power was granted? What is the purpose for which the power was actually exercised? If the power is exercised for an improper purpose, then the duty will have been breached. Where there is more than one purpose, the test will be whether or not the improper purpose was a significant contributing cause to the exercise of the power, and, but for its presence, the power would not have been exercised. This chapter then considered the potential for law reform, discussing the recognition within the Companies Act 2006 (UK) of ESV in s 172. We agreed that the current s 172 is validly criticised for the lack of utility in providing that directors ‘have regard to’ other stakeholder considerations when they must retain as their primary consideration the benefit to the members as a whole. This chapter concluded with the duty not to fetter discretion, which requires directors to retain their independence at the time of decision-making in order to comply with the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and for proper purposes. Chapter 13 addresses the duties of loyalty and good faith through the standard of conduct expected from directors, such as those dealing with conflicts of interest, including the fiduciary duty of directors and senior employees, the corresponding duties in ss 182-3 of the Corporations Act, and the other Corporations Act duties relating to disclosure of conflicts.

1 this jurisdiction is explained in more detail at Section 13.10.05. 2 Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corporation (1984) 156 CLR 41. 3 First appearing in Australia in Moss v Moss (No 2) (1900) 21 LR (NSW) Eq 253, 258, and confirmed by the High Court of Australia in numerous cases from Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corporation (1984) 156 CLR 41 to Friend v Booker (2009) 239 CLR 129. 4 As adopted by the High Court in Chan v Zacharia (1984) 154 CLR 178, 198-9 (Deane J). 8 Richard Brady Franks Ltd v Price (1937) 58 CLR 112, 135. § Aleyn v Belchier (1758) 1 Eden 132, 138. 7 Re Smith & Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304. 8 Hogg v Cramphorn Ltd [1967] Ch 254.

2 Harlowe’s Nominees Pty Ltd v Woodside (Lakes Entrance) Oil Co NL (1968) 121 CLR 483. 19 See, eg, the separation of the duties as reflected in statute as separate provisions: Companies Act 2006 (UK) ss 171-2; Companies Act 1993 (NZ) ss 131, 133, Other texts would include Australia within this category, outlining two separate duties in the general law: see, eg, R Austin and | Ramsay, Ford, Austin and Ramsay's Principles of Corporations Law (LexisNexis, 17th ed, 2018) ch 8. As noted above, Australian case law has not been uniform on this division in the general law. 11 Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9) (2009) 39 WAR 1 [76]. 22 Allen v Gold Reefs of West Africa Ltd [1900] 1 Ch 656, 671; although Lord Lindley MR was discussing the use of voting power by a shareholder majority, this case was relied upon by the High Court for applying this duty to directors in Richard Brady Franks Ltd v Price (1937) 58 CLR 112, 135. 13 Richard Brady Franks Ltd v Price (1937) 58 CLR 112, 138; Mills v Mills (1938) 60 CLR 150, 188. 14 mills v Mills (1938) 60 CLR 150, 175. 15 Re Smith & Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304, 304-5, 308. 18 bid 306. 42. Coco v The Queen (1994) 179 CLR 427; Al-Kateb v Godwin (2004) 219 CLR 562. 18 Re Smith & Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304, 306. 12 Ibid 308. 20 |bid 308-9.

21 Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9) (2009) 39 WAR 1 [4619]. 22 Hutton v West Cork Railway Co (1883) 23 Ch D 654, 671.

23 See, eg, Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9) (2009) 39 WAR 1 [4602]-[4608]. Owen J's findings were largely upheld, although the appeal judges each accounted for the outcome slightly differently: Westpac Banking Corporation v Bell Group Ltd (in liq) (No 3) (2012) 44 WAR 1 [923] (Lee AJA), [1988], [2021] (Drummond AJA), [2795]- [2797] (Carr AJA). 24 Hutton v West Cork Railway Co (1883) 23 Ch D 654, 662. 25 Ibid 671. 26 Regentcrest plc (in liq) v Cohen [2001] 2 BCLC 80 [120]-[123]. 22 bid [123], as cited by Drummond AJA in Westpac Banking Corporation v Bell Group Ltd (in liq) (No 3) (2012) 44 WAR 1 [1988]. See also Westpac Banking Corporation v Bell Group Ltd (in liq) (No 3) (2012) 44 WAR 1 [933] (Lee AJA). 28 mills v Mills (1938) 60 CLR 150.

29 Bonus shares, issued for no consideration and generally out of the company’s funds, are discussed in Chapter 8 at Section 8.15.15. 30 mills v Mills (1938) 60 CLR 150, 162.

22 Ibid 163-4. 3 Ibid 164. 34 Ibid 164-5. Starke J appears to agree with Latham CJ: (1938) 60 CLR 150, 179. Dixon J focused more on the purpose for which the power was exercised than the question of
