# Chapter 4

Formation and types of companies 4.05 Introduction

## 4.05.05 Defining ‘corporation’ 4.10 The registration process 4.15 The consequences of registration 4.20 Types of corporation 4.25 Some other types of corporate entities

## 4.25.05 Incorporated associations

## 4.25.10 Co-operatives

## 4.25.15 Statutory corporations 4,30 Companies under the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)

## 4.35.05 Proprietary companies

## 4.35.10 Public companies

## 4.35.20 Changing proprietary/public status 4.40 Liability of members to the company

## 4.40.05 Company limited by shares

## 4.40.10 Company limited by guarantee

## 4.40.15 Unlimited liability company.

## 4.40.20 No liability company 4.45 Change of status 4.50 Registration patterns 4.60 Registrable Australian bodies and foreign companies 4.65 Further wavs of classifvina cornorations

Acompany is a legal entity, distinct from its creators, members, directors and managers. Chapter 3 of this book discusses the separate legal status of the company in detail. For the purposes of this chapter, we emphasise that for a company to come into existence there must be a conferral of that status by the state. Unlike some other forms of association, such as a partnership, it is not legally effective for a group of people to simply declare themselves to be a company. A company is a type of corporation. The corporate status of a company is brought into existence through a process of registration under the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth). Other types of corporate entities are created by different legislative mechanisms, and we briefly describe some of these later in this chapter. This chapter describes the range of basic company structures available under the Corporations Act, focusing on three ways in which companies can be categorised: the proprietary or public status; how the liability of their members is structured; and the relationship to other companies. This chapter examines the role of corporate groups, as well as the difference between closely-held, one-person, and widely-held companies.

## 4.05.05 Defining ‘corporation’

A company is a type of corporation. While the focus of this book is on companies, some sections in the Corporations Act refer to‘corporation’ and others refer to ‘company’ Accordingly, it is useful to focus for a moment on the scope of the term ‘corporation’. Section 57A defines the term ‘corporation’ for the purposes of the Corporations Act (the Act). It does this by specifying, in a non-exhaustive way, four types of entity that fall within the definition, and by excluding others. Once the specific exclusions are noted, the definition of ‘corporation’ in the Act is open-ended. The effect of ss 57A(1) and (3) is that the term ‘corporation, wherever it is used in the Act, includes (but is not limited to) four types of entities: (1) a company: this is defined in s 9 to mean a company registered under the Act, and this type of corporation is the focus of this book. For the purposes of the Act, a company is a subset of the broader category of ‘corporation’ (2) any body corporate: this term is not defined comprehensively in the Act; under general law, the term ‘body corporate’ refers to ‘any body whatsoever that has corporate personality’ (3) an unincorporated body that may be sue or be sued, or may hold property in the name of its secretary or an office-holder of the body (4) an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporation that is registered under the Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006 (Cth). There are two specific exclusions from the definition in s 57A(2). First, an ‘exempt public authority’ is not a corporation for the purposes of the Act. This term is defined in s 9 to mean a body corporate incorporated within Australia (or an external Territory) that is either a ‘public authority’ or an ‘instrumentality or agency of the Crown: None of these terms are defined in the Act, and so reference must be made to case law. In Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Bank of Western Australia, Hill J noted that a private body established for profit cannot be a ‘public authority’ Rather, the body must be ‘an agency or instrument of government set up to exercise control or execute a function in the public interest’ and, further, ‘must perform a traditional or inalienable function of government and have government authority for so doing’3 The second exclusion is a ‘corporation sole’ This is also not defined in the Act. The term refers to the largely historical circumstance where the occupant of a particular position or office was given corporate status. As described in Blackstone's Commentaries: Corporations sole consist of one person only and his [sic] successors, in some particular station, who are incorporated by law, in order to give them some legal capacities and advantages, particularly that of perpetuity, which in their natural persons they could not have had. In this sense the king is a sole corporation; so is a bishop ...4 Ins 9 of the Act, a company is defined as ‘a company registered under this Act: The process whereby a new company is created as a separate legal entity un- der the Act is relatively straightforward. The main steps are as follows. First, the company’s name mut be reserved. An application may be made to the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) to reserve a specified name (s 152). Part 2B.6 of the Act deals with the availability and restrictions on the use of company names. This includes requirements, noted later in this chapter, to include the words ‘Limited; ‘Proprietary; ‘No Liability’ (as appropriate) or their abbreviations at the end of the company’s name. A company may be registered with a name consisting only of the Australian Company Number (ACN) that it receives on registration (s 148(1)). The Corporations Regulations 2001 (Cth) specify prohibitions or restrictions on the use of certain words and phrases in a company’s name. These include ‘Trust’ and ‘Incorporated; as well as words that suggest a connection with the Commonwealth or a state or territory government, the Royal Family, or Sir Donald Bradman.2 Once a company is registered, it must set out its name (if it has one) and ACN on all public documents and negotiable instruments that the company signs or issues (s 153). The second step is preparing internal management rules and obtaining consents. Each company has rules that govern its internal management and its capital structure. The company’s original incorporators must decide whether the company will rely initially on the replaceable rules in the Act, or whether the company will have a constitution which replaces those rules in whole or in part. If there is to be a constitution, then each person who is to be a member when the company is registered must agree in writing to the terms of the constitution (s 136(1)). Each person who is to be a member, director or company secretary® of the company at the time that it is registered must give their consent to act in that capacity (s 120). A proprietary company must have at least one director, who must ordinarily reside in Australia2 and a public company must have a minimum of three directors, two of whom must ordinarily reside in Australia (s 201A). A public company must have at least one secretary (again, ordinarily residing in Australia); a proprietary company is not required to have a secretary (s 204A). If the company is to have a share capital, the members must also consent to take up a specified number of shares, and to pay the amount per share required on registration. After the company is registered, the company must keep these agreements and consents. The third step is lodgement of the application for registration (and payment of registration fees). The application is made on the prescribed form and must contain the information set out in s 117(2). The required information includes: the type of company to be registered (the different types of company are explained later in this chapter) the company’s proposed name (unless the ACN is to be used) the name and address of each person who has consented to become a member the present name, former names, place and date of birth of each person who has consented to become a director or company secretary the address of the company’s proposed registered office if the company has a share capital—the number of shares which each member agrees to take up, and the amount which each member agrees to pay if the company is limited by guarantee—the amount of the guarantee that each member has agreed to (companies limited by guarantee are explained laterin this chapter). If the company is to be a public company the application must be accompanied by a copy of its constitution (if any). Registration can be done by lodging hard-copy documents with ASIC, or it can be done online* The final step is registration by ASIC. Following lodgement of the application for registration, ASIC ‘may’ give the company an ACN, register the company and issue a certificate of registration (s 118). The certificate of registration includes the company’s name, ACN, type of company, and date of registration. It states that the company is registered as a company under the Act and names the state or territory in which the company is taken to have been registered. Importantly, the certificate is conclusive evidence that all of the registration requirements have been complied with, and that the company was duly registered on the date specified in the certificate (s 1274(7A)). This section is not binding on the Crown as represented by ASIC. ASIC is not precluded by s 1274(7A) from challenging the validity of a company’s registration2 Acompany comes into existence at the beginning of the day on which it is registered. The relative ease with which a company can be brought into existence might draw attention away from the significance of the legal consequences that flow from registration. From the day of registration, the directors, members and company officers are subject to a complex web of legal rights, duties, regulatory requirements and liabilities. There are also consequences for the newly created company. These consequences stem from the fact that, upon registration, a company comes into existence as a body corporate (s 119). The key consequences of a company’s status as a body corporate are summarised here, and are dealt with more fully in Chapter 3. Acompany can sue and be sued in its own right. Generally speaking, when a wrong is done to a company, then only the company has standing to bring legal action regarding that wrong. This is known as the ‘proper plaintiff principle’. Historically, this principle caused significant difficulties for company members when the wrong to the company was done by those who control the actions of the company. These difficulties and the legislative response to them are discussed in Chapter 14. Acompany has perpetual succession. A company continues as the same legal entity regardless of changes in its members or management, or changes in name or type of corporation. This means that control of a company can be passed from one person or group to another without affecting the legal existence of the corporate entity. A company’s legal existence is ‘perpetual’ in that it can only be terminated by the company being dissolved as a consequence of a winding up or, where the company is defunct, by having its registration cancelled (see Chapter 16). Acompany has the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, independently of the owners or managers of the company. The members and directors of a company have no legal or equitable interest in the company’s property. In the words of one judge: The fact that an individual by himself or his nominees holds practically all the shares in a company may give him control of the company ... but it does not ... make the property or assets of the company his, as distinct from the corporation's. Nor does it make any difference if he acquires not practically the whole, but absolutely the whole, of the shares. The business of the company does not thereby become his business.12 Some of the most frequently encountered problems in corporate law, both with small family businesses and large publicly-traded companies, occur when those who run the business ignore, or do not fully appreciate, the position of the company as a separate legal entity. This may result from the fact that, in practice, the registration of a company is regarded only as one step in a longer process of achieving some particular goal; for example, establishing a business, taxation minimisation, or eligibility to receive external funding. In corporate law, the terms ‘company’ or ‘corporation’ are often used as though there is a standard type of corporate organisation to which corporate law rules and principles can be applied. A moment's reflection reveals that there is great diversity in corporate forms and their uses. Corporate enterprises range from a single company providing a not-for-profit welfare service, to a complex multi-corporate profit-making conglomerate that operates on a global scale. As the renowned economist JK Galbraith observed, ‘[T]here is no such thing as a corporation. Rather there are several kinds of corporations all deriving from a com- mon but very loose framework/1! Understanding the diversity of different corporate types is an important prerequisite to appreciating the wide impact of corporate law principles. An important question for law reformers is whether the law should pay greater attention to this diversity, so that specific legal principles and regulatory regimes apply to different types of corporation. This chapter explains the basic types of corporate structures and organisation. The chapter is concerned primarily with companies registered and operating under the Corporations Act. However, at the outset, it is useful to be aware of the existence of other corporate forms. Here we describe three different types of corporate legal entity that exist outside the Act. This discussion emphasises that, in certain circumstances, there are alternative ways to achieve some of the benefits of corporate status.
## 4.25.05 Incorporated associations

Each Australian state and territory has an Associations Incorporation Act that provides a form of incorporation for associations with non-profit objectives.!2 These Acts were originally introduced to offer a relatively simple alternative to the Corporations Act for groups, such as community and sporting organisations, who seek the advantages of corporate legal status without the regulatory costs.3 However, over time some of these Acts have been amended with the introduction of disclosure and liability provisions drafted in terms similar to those found in the Corporations Act. There are differences in detail between these statutes, but the scope and operation can be understood by using the Associations Incorporation Act 1991 (ACT) as an example. An association with at least five members may seek incorporation. An association is ineligible if it has the object of trading or obtaining pecuniary gain for its members or it has capital divided into shares held by its members. Trading or obtaining pecuniary gain is only a disqualification where the purpose is to return the income earned to members for their gain. It is permissible for a non-profit association to trade in order to raise funds to support its non-profit activities.“4 Once incorporated, an association has all of the legal features of a body corporate, such as perpetual succession and the capacity to acquire, hold and dispose of property in its own name (these features are discussed in Chapter 3). Members and officers have limited liability, subject to the Act and to the rules of the association. The abbreviation ‘Inc: must be included in the name of the association. Annual accounts must be prepared, audited, and presented to the annual general meeting of the association. The Act also contains provisions analogous to those found in the Corporations Act concerning matters such as pre-incorporation contracts, the authentication and execution of documents, and the effect of restrictions in the association's rules concerning its powers.

## 4.25.10 Co-operatives

A co-operative (or ‘co-op’ is an incorporated entity that is owned and democratically controlled by its members. Co-operatives range from small, local community concerns to multi-million-dollar trading businesses. States and territories have legislation that either adopts a uniform national legislative template for co-operatives, known as the Co-operatives National Law (CNL), or is consistent with that template. In New South Wales, for example, the National Law is set out as an appendix to the Co-operatives (Adoption of National Law) Act 2012 (NSW). Under the CNL, a co-operative becomes a corporation once it is registered (s 28). The CNL sets out seven ‘co-operative principles’ with which incorporated entities must comply (s 10). These include the idea that co-operatives are autonomous, self-help organisations controlled by their members, and that members will usually receive limited compensation, if any, on the capital that they put into the co-operative. The CNL contains provisions that either directly apply specified sections of the Corporations Act to co-operatives, or that are worded in similar terms. For example, the provisions in the CNL concerning the duties and liabilities of directors and officers of a co-operative closely resemble the equivalent sections in the Corporations Act.

## 4.25.15 Statutory corporations

It is common practice for governments to create particular corporations by special Acts of Parliament. These statutory corporations fall outside the operation of the Corporations Act unless their Act of incorporation provides otherwise. Commonwealth examples range from well-known entities (such as the Australian Human Rights Commission, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, and Airservices Australia), to the esoteric (such as the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation). Universities such as the Australian National University and the University of Adelaide are statutory corporations. Occasionally, a statutory corporation is later converted into a company incorporated under the Corporations Act, as part of a process of privatising governmental instrumentalities. The conversion of the Commonwealth Bank in 1990 and its subsequent public share offer was a prominent example of this process. Along with statutory corporations, there are a large number of companies created wholly or partly by federal, state or territory governments under the Corporations Act. These companies may be used by governments to engage in commercial ventures as government business enterprises, or for the provision of other government services. Significant policy questions are raised when a government has a total, controlling, or substantial membership interest in a corporation created under general incorporation legislation. In particular, should the corporation be regarded as a public institution or is it similar to any other privately incorporated body? The answer to this question will determine the types of accountability mechanisms to be imposed. Most Australian jurisdictions have enacted legislation to control different aspects of the activities of government owned corporations./* The legislation discussed in the previous paragraphs is aimed at specific types of corporate organisations, established for specific purposes or with particular organisational structures. Where the intention is to conduct a profit-making enterprise with the aim of returning those profits to members, then incorporation under the Corporations Act will be appropriate. We now turn our attention to the different possibilities under that legislation. Within the parameters of the Corporations Act, companies can be categorised according to three criteria: (1) Is the company proprietary or public? (2) How is the liability of the members structured? (3) What is the relationship of the company to other corporations?

These criteria can overlap; for example, we can categorise a company both by whether it is proprietary or public, and by its relationship to other companies. We look at each of these three criteria and discuss some other ways companies governed by the Corporations Act can be classified. All corporations incorporated under the Corporations Act are classified either as proprietary or public companies. These two categories have different historical origins: the modern public company developed from the English joint stock companies of the nineteenth century, while the proprietary company was a later legislative creation. Chapter 1 describes this history. A proprietary company is sometimes described as a private company; in the United Kingdom this is the standard legal terminology.1® However, the labels ‘public’ and ‘private’ can cause confusion. Political theorists and sociologists frequently refer to the ‘public/ private divide’ in their analyses of modern society, where the ‘public’ is the realm of governments and the ‘private’ is the realm of individual citizens. The corporate law categories of public company and proprietary/private company have little to do with that distinction. Instead, these labels are used to indicate a company’s capacity to raise funds from outside sources, and the extent of its obligations to disclose its financial affairs. To avoid confusion, we will use the terms ‘proprietary’ and ‘public’ company.

## 4.35.05 Proprietary companies
Under the Corporations Act, a proprietary company must satisfy the following five requirements: (1) It must have a share capital (s 112(1)). A person becomes a member of a proprietary company by acquiring ownership of one or more shares in the company. This means that in a proprietary company the terms ‘member’ and ‘shareholder’ mean the same thing. (2) It must have at least one member (s 114) but cannot have any more than 50 non-employee shareholders as members (s 113). An employee shareholder is a shareholder who is also an employee of the company (or was, when they became a shareholder) (s 113(2)(b)). The Act allows for more than 50 employee shareholders because this recognises the beneficial effect that employee share schemes can have on a company’s operations. The minimum requirement of one member was discussed in Re Dungowan Manly Pty Ltd (in liq), where Black J noted that although s 114 does not provide a penalty for breach, the requirement should not be disregarded. In that case, the Court disallowed a scheme which would have cancelled all of the shares in the company with the consequence that the company would have had no members.“ Section 231 describes how‘a person’ becomes a member, and the term ‘person’ is defined in s 2C of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth) to include a body politic or corporate as well as an individual. This means that a company can be a member of another company. (3) It must have at least one director, who must ordinarily reside in Australia (s 201A(1))18 A body corporate cannot be appointed as a director of a company (s 201B(1)), which also specifies the minimum age for an individual to be appointed as a director).12 As discussed in Chapter 10, a company can be classified as a‘shadow director’ (see para (b)(ii) of the definition of director in s 9) for the purposes of incurring directors’ liability: see Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Ltd v Antico2° A company can be a member of another corporation—this can lead to the creation of complex corporate groups. The minimum membership and minimum director requirements in points (2) and (3) can overlap. A proprietary company may consist of one person occupying both the roles of sole member and sole director. The idea of a‘one-person’ company is examined in more detail later in this chapter. (4) It must not engage in any activity that would activate the operation of the fundraising provisions in ch 6D of the Corporations Act. This means that a proprietary company is not able to offer its shares for public subscription nor invite offers for subscription. It can offer its shares to existing company members or employees (5 113(3)).2 (5) It must include the words ‘Proprietary Limited’ or the abbreviation ‘Pty Ltd’ at the end of its name (ss 148(2), 149). This serves to indicate to persons who deal with, or intend to become members of, the company that it is bound by the above requirements and limitations. In Chapter 1, we noted that public disclosure by companies of financial information has long been thought of as the necessary quid pro quo for the privilege of limited liability.22 The historical reason for this is that the publication of such material is presumed to counter the possibilities of fraud and also to provide information to persons who are considering whether to trade with or invest in a company. This rationale can be seen more clearly (although there is continued debate)? in relation to large public companies whose main method of raising finances is by public solicitation. But it is less clear that the rationale applies with the same force to smaller proprietary companies. On the one hand, it can be argued that while proprietary companies with a small capital base can pose a risk to outsiders, those outsiders will frequently resort to other mechanisms to protect their interests, such as contractual terms and personal guarantees from the company directors. On the other hand, without a system of mandatory public disclosure, many creditors, such as trade suppliers, would be deprived of information that helps to ascertain the risk and creditworthiness of the companies with which they deal.“ This debate has been addressed by the recognition in legislation in Australia of a sub-species of proprietary company. The Corporations Act makes a distinction between large and small proprietary companies. The purpose of this distinction is to implement a legislative policy Asmall proprietary company is defined as a proprietary company that, for a financial year, falls below any two of those three criteria (s 45A(2)). The advantages the Corporations Act gives to small proprietary companies include the following:

* asmall proprietary company does not have to prepare a financial report and directors’ report for a financial year unless a direction that this should be done
is given either by shareholders with at least 5 per cent of the votes or by ASIC (ss 293-4)

+ where a small proprietary company is directed to prepare a financial report, the report does not have to be audited unless shareholders with at least 5 per
cent of the votes have directed that the financial report be prepared and audited (ss 293, 301(2)), or ASIC has given a direction under s 294. Note that the categorisation of a proprietary company as large or small is determined based on factors that may vary from one financial year to the next. This means that over a number of years a company may have to meet different financial reporting requirements as its business expands or contracts and, consequently, as its status as a large or small proprietary company changes. In historical terms, proprietary companies were a relatively late addition to our corporate law system (see Chapter 1). While many proprietary companies are responsible for large business operations with annual revenue worth hundreds of millions of dollars, most proprietary companies tend to be small-to middlesize trading concerns, or small family companies. This is recognised by the inclusion of a‘Small Business Guide’ in pt 1.5 of the Corporations Act, which summarises the main provisions in the Act that apply to proprietary companies limited by shares. Many proprietary companies are incorporated for purposes other than the active conduct of a business venture, such as tax minimisation and property planning objectives. This serves as a reminder that modern corporate law is not concerned exclusively with business concerns—a large number of corporations are non-commercial, non-trading concerns that operate more like partnerships or sole-proprietorships.

## 4.35.10 Public companies

The public company is a residual category and is defined in the Corporations Act as any company other than a proprietary company (s 9). The principal legal characteristics of a public company are as follows: (1) it must have at least one member (s 114); unlike a proprietary company, there is no statutory maximum (2) it must have a minimum of three directors, at least two of whom must ordinarily reside in Australia (s 201A(2)) (3) it may raise funds by making offers or invitations to the public to purchase or subscribe for securities (see Chapter 9). To enhance the marketability of its securities, a public company may decide to apply for listing on a securities exchange (see Chapter 17). A public company need not have a share capital, in which case it is classified as a company limited by guarantee. This is discussed later in this chapter.

## 4.35.15 Other differences between proprietary and public companies

The Corporations Act makes other distinctions between proprietary and public companies. One important set of distinctions is found in the provisions of the Act that operate as replaceable rules which may govern a company’s internal management (see s 134; the concept of replaceable rules is discussed in Chapter 5). A summary list of these replaceable rules is found in s 141. Some of these rules are only relevant to proprietary companies, while in one instance (s 249X, governing who can appoint a proxy at a general meeting) the rule is replaceable only for proprietary companies and is mandatory for public companies. Examples of replaceable rules that are relevant only to proprietary companies are: s 194: dealing with the capacity of directors of proprietary companies to vote on contracts that involve the company and in which they have a declared interest s 254D: granting a pre-emption right for existing shareholders in a proprietary company when fresh shares are issued22 s 254W(2): giving directors of a proprietary company the power to pay dividends as they see fit s 1072G: giving directors of a proprietary company a discretion to refuse to register a transfer of shares in a company for any reason.28 Other differences between proprietary and public companies relate to the directors and administration of the corporation. For example:

+ Public companies must appoint each director by a separate resolution unless there is unanimous agreement to a single resolution (s 201E).
+ Adirector of a public company may be removed before the end of his or her term by an ordinary resolution of the members regardless of anything in the
company’s constitution (s 203D). The removal of directors in a proprietary company is governed by the company’s constitution, which might permit reseUunues, @ PULL KUrpany Hay USUUS WW app Ir Haury Ul g clues CALHaNYyS GEE Kuapecr ty. s 1072G: giving directors of a proprietary company a discretion to refuse to register a transfer of shares in a company for any reason.28 Other differences between proprietary and public companies relate to the directors and administration of the corporation. For example: A director of a public company may be removed before the end of his or her term by an ordinary resolution of the members regardless of anything in the company’s constitution (s 203D). The removal of directors in a proprietary company is governed by the company’s constitution, which might permit removal by a resolution of the board or of the general meeting (see, for example, the replaceable rule in s 203C permitting removal by a members’ resolution). A director of a public company who has a material interest in a matter being considered by the board must not vote on that matter or be present while it is being discussed unless permitted by other non-affected members of the board (s 195). Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act closely regulates the giving of financial benefits to related parties of public companies. There are many other differences regarding matters such as members’ and directors’ meetings, financial reporting, appointment and resignation of auditors, and takeovers. These are discussed elsewhere in this book.

## 4.35.20 Changing proprietary/public status

As prescribed by s 162(1), a public company may convert to proprietary status and a proprietary company may convert to public company status by passing a special resolution? to that effect and lodging with ASIC the documents required by s 163 (for example, a copy of the special resolution). A change in a company’s status does not create a new legal entity (s 166(1)). A proprietary company may be required by ASIC to change its status to a public company if it breaches the proprietary company requirements set out in s 113 regarding the maximum number of non-employee shareholders and the restriction on public fundraising (s 165). Further discussion about changing company status can be found later in this chapter at Section 4.45. The second way in which the Corporations Act classifies corporations is by reference to how the liability of members is structured. There are four alternatives listed in s 112.

## 4.40.05 Company limited by shares

This is a company in which the capital is divided into shares and a member is only liable to pay to the company the amount that is unpaid on their shares (ss 9 and 516). For example, a shareholder may subscribe to 2,000 $1 shares in a company. Assume that the company does not require the full $1 per share to be paid at the time of initial subscription, and the shareholder pays 20 cents per share. The shareholder is now a member of the company and has an outstanding liability to the company for the remaining 80 cents per share ($1,600). Once the shares have been fully paid, the liability to the company of that shareholder (and any future holders of those shares) has been discharged. Acompany limited by shares is required to include the word ‘Limited’ or the abbreviation ‘Ltd’ at the end of the company’s name (s 148(2)). This requirement originates in the idea that creditors will be warned that their loans can only be satisfied out of the company’s assets, not those of the member shareholders. Since the majority of companies incorporated today are limited liability companies, it is likely that this warning is simply assumed by creditors. Companies with a share capital can be either proprietary or public. A public company with a share capital may choose to apply to have its shares listed for trading on a securities exchange, but this is not a requirement of the Corporations Act (see Chapter 17). The holding of shares in a proprietary company can be distinguished from a public company in another way. A number of proprietary companies are small organisations where there is a close association between the shareholders, and between the shareholders and the directors. In such a situation, share ownership is primarily a means of allocating liability and of structuring power and control in the company. In contrast, share ownership in public companies is frequently a function of investment rather than a means of apportioning control. Shareholders in public companies may regard themselves primarily as investors, while shareholders in a proprietary company may regard themselves foremost as members. As seen in Chapter 14, these differences in perspective are often ignored by corporate law doctrine.

## 4.40.10 Company limited by guarantee

Acompany limited by guarantee does not have a share capital and has no power to issue shares (s 124(1)). In this type of company, the members undertake that, if the company is wound up, they will contribute a specified amount to the property of the company for distribution to the company’s creditors (ss 9, 517). The liability of members only arises if the company is wound up and has insufficient assets to meet its liabilities at that time. Members are not required to pay any capital to the company while it is a going concern. Equally, the company is prohibited from paying a dividend to its members (s 254SA). Without the input of share capital, these companies will rely on outside sources for funds. Trading entities are unlikely to adopt this form of incorporation because of the lack of starting capital. Welfare, social and not-for-profit organisations with small capital needs that can be met by membership subscriptions, donations or government grants are the most common users of this type of incorporation 22 However, not all guarantee companies are small affairs. Ironically, one of the largest collapses in Australian corporate history was a company limited by guarantee—the National Safety Council of Australia Victorian Division. This company had 300 full-time employees and, at the time it was wound up, had losses estimated at $65,644,000. The collapse was triggered by large-scale fraud committed by the company’s chief executive officer. An action brought by a creditor against the directors resulted in one director being found personally liable to pay approximately $97 million and a significant judicial decision on the duties of care owed by non-executive directors.2! Because they do not have a share capital, companies limited by guarantee must be incorporated as public companies and must include the word ‘Limited’ or the abbreviation ‘Ltd’ at the end of the company name (s 148(2)). Non-profit or community organisations that operate as companies limited by guarantee might want to avoid any unwanted impression of commercial activity that could be conveyed by this addition to the company name. Accordingly, under s 150, ASIC may permit the registration of a company limited by guarantee without the word ‘Limited’ in its name if the company is a not-for-profit entity registered under the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012 (Cth) as a charity,2 and its constitution prohibits the payment of fees to its directors, and requires directors to approve all other payments made by the company to the directors.

## 4.40.15 Unlimited liability company

A public or a proprietary company can be registered as an unlimited liability company. This type of incorporation dates back to early English company 150, ASIC may permit the registration of a company limited by guarantee without the word ‘Limited’ in its name if the company is a not-for-profit entity registered under the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012 (Cth) as a charity,2 and its constitution prohibits the payment of fees to its directors, and requires directors to approve all other payments made by the company to the directors.

## 4.40.15 Unlimited liability company

A public or a proprietary company can be registered as an unlimited liability company. This type of incorporation dates back to early English company statutes, which permitted incorporation by registration but did not grant limited liability to the company’s members. As its name suggests, the members of such a company are financially liable without any limit for the debts of the company if its assets are insufficient to meet its liabilities (s 9). Unlimited liability companies must be incorporated with a share capital. This means that, on winding up of the company, each member will, first, be liable to pay to the company any unpaid amounts on their shares. If this is insufficient to meet the liabilities of the company, then members will be asked to make further contributions to discharge the company’s debts. There is no requirement that these companies include in their name any indication of their members’ unlimited liability, but an unlimited proprietary company must include the word ‘Proprietary’ at the end of its name (s 148(3)). The main advantage of this type of incorporation is that an unlimited liability company is not subject to the limitations on share capital reductions that are imposed on a company limited by shares (s 258A). This means that shareholders can have their capital returned to them and be released from further liability to the company while it is still an operating entity. This form of company is sometimes used by professional practices, such as lawyers or accountants.

## 4.40.20 Noli 'y company

This type of company has no contractual right under its constitution to recover any amounts unpaid on shares from a current shareholder (ss 9, 112(2) and 254M(2)). A shareholder may elect to forfeit the shares rather than pay any unpaid amount which is called by the company. The statutory right of a shareholder to forfeit shares instead of paying some or all of the outstanding amounts can be negated by prior agreement between the shareholder and the company.2 This form of incorporation was first introduced by the Mining Companies Act 1871 (Vic) in response to the problem of ‘dummying’—a practice whereby shareholders in speculative mining ventures were registered under fictitious names to avoid having to pay unpaid amounts on their shares. There is debate about whether this legislation was a creative move to encourage investment in speculative mining ventures, or‘a backward looking, short-term expedient to the problems created by the lack of an effective corporate enforcement mechanism in the colonies'24 Whatever view is taken of its history, this category of incorporation is now restricted to companies with share capital whose sole object (as stated in the company constitution) is mining purposes (s 112(2))2 although many large mining companies are incorporated as public companies limited by shares. A no liability company is prohibited from engaging in activities that are outside its mining purposes (s 112(3)). This type of company is identified by the words ‘No Liability’ or the abbreviation ‘NL, which must be included at the end of the company name (s 148(4)). No liability companies must be incorporated as public companies (s 112(1)). Subject to some exceptions, these companies are bound by the provisions of the Corporations Act relating to public companies. If a no liability company is listed on the Australian Securities Exchange, it will also be subject to specific listing rules. Other sections specific to no liability companies are found in ss 254P-254R of the Corporations Act, dealing with the process by which shares in a no liability company may be forfeited. Part 2B.7 (ss 162-7) of the Corporations Act permits certain changes of company status. A change of status has the potential to affect the liability of present and past members and creditors, and any conversion is subject to procedural restrictions to protect members and creditors. In Windsor v National Mutual Life Association of Australasia Ltd, the Federal Court held that the sections dealing with change of company type are intended to cover the field and that a company cannot change its status by some other method, such as a scheme of arrangement2® For a change of company status to be effective, the members must first pass a special resolution approving the change. That resolution must then accompany an application lodged with ASIC. For certain types of change, other documentation must be submitted with the application. In general, the changes requiring specific documentation are those with the potential to increase the obligations or liabilities of members: a change from limited liability to unlimited liability, or a change from liability limited by guarantee to liability limited by shares (see s 163). In all cases, the change of status is effected when ASIC publishes a notice that the details of the company’s registration will be altered to reflect the company’s new status (s 164). The permissible conversions are set out in Table 4.1. Table 4.1 Permissible conversions s 162(1) This type of company may change... ... to this type of company Proprietary company limited by shares Unlimited proprietary company Unlimited public company Public company limited by shares Unlimited proprietary company Proprietary company limited by shares* Public company limited by shares* Unlimited public company Public company limited by shares Unlimited public company Unlimited proprietary company Proprietary company limited by shares No liability company Company limited by guarantee Public company limited by shares Unlimited public company Proprietary company limited by shares Unlimited proprietary company Unlimited public company Public company limited by shares* Proprietary company limited by shares* Unlimited proprietary company Public no liability company Public company limited by shares* Proprietary company limited by shares**

*This change is permitted only if, within the last three years, the company was not a limited company that became an unlimited company. ** This change is permitted only if all the issued shares are fully paid up.

Achange in status does not mean that a new legal entity is created, and the change does not affect the company’s existing property, rights, obligations, or its role in any legal proceedings (s 166(1)).. In 2022-3, there were 3.2 million companies registered in Australia. Although ASIC data does not break down this number into proprietary and public companies, other data from 2013 shows that nearly 99 per cent of all companies registered in Australia are proprietary companies, with 87 per cent of those companies having only one or two shareholders.22 Public companies limited by shares account for approximately 1 per cent of all registrations. The next most popular form of incorporation is companies limited by guarantee. While these figures provide some perspective on the make-up of corporate Australia, they refer only to company registrations. The figures tell us nothing about the economic significance of these different categories, nor are they an indication of the actual number of businesses run via these corporations. According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, in June 2023, 41 per cent of the 2.5 million active businesses in Australia were structured as companies; the rest are run as partnerships, trusts or sole proprietorships.*# Many corporations are grouped together as part of a single business operation. This important feature of corporate organisation is discussed next. The third way in which we can categorise companies under the Corporations Act is as holding companies or subsidiary companies. Section 46 deems a com- pany22 to be a subsidiary of another if: (1) the first company controls the composition of the subsidiary’s board of directors. This includes having the power to appoint or remove all, or a majority, of the directors of the subsidiary. For these purposes, the power to appoint directors includes the situation where appointment to the board of the subsidiary follows necessarily from appointment as a director or officer of the first company (s 47); or (2) the first company can cast or control the casting of more than half of the maximum votes that might be cast at a general meeting of the subsidiary; or (3) the first company holds more than half of the subsidiary company’s issued share capital. These criteria do not include cases where the first company holds shares or has power only in a fiduciary capacity (s 48(2)). Section 48 contains further exceptions to the definition. The standard implied by the reference to ‘control’ of the composition of the subsidiary’s board of directors in s 46 was considered in Mount Edon Gold Mines (Australia) Ltd v Burmine Ltd,4° where the Court was urged by the plaintiff to hold that practical or de facto control was sufficient to satisfy the test. White J disagreed, holding that: [Elach of the three subparagraphs ... is concerned with legal power. It is difficult to see how, in the absence of a legal power, a body corporate could be said to control the composition of the board of another body corporate, by virtue of what it in fact does, when another body holds more than one-half the maximum number of votes that might be cast at a general meeting of the company.4! His Honour explained the difficulties inherent in the plaintiff's argument in the following example: [Sluppose that the shares of a company are held as to 80 per cent by shareholder A, as to 15 per cent by shareholder B and as to 5 per cent by shareholder C, and that, perhaps as a result of apathy, shareholder A is customarily absent from general meetings of the company. In the result, shareholder B is accustomed to appoint his nominees to the board of directors of the company and to remove directors of the company as it may decide, whether or not shareholder C agrees. In such a case, if the plaintiff is correct, the company is a subsidiary of shareholder B, a situation that is liable to be changed on short notice if shareholder A decides at any time to exercise its rights.22 The source of legally enforceable power to control the composition of the subsidiary’s board might be found in that company’s constitution or in a separate agreement among the subsidiary’s shareholders, conferring control on the holding company. Aholding company is defined as a body corporate that has a subsidiary (s 9). The Corporations Act permits the creation of a wholly owned subsidiary, which is a company that has no members other than its holding company or a nominee or other wholly owned subsidiary of the ultimate holding company (s 9). Subsidiary-holding company relationships are not restricted to simple two-company situations. In the case where company C is a subsidiary of company B, and company B is a subsidiary of company A, then company C is also classified as a subsidiary of company A (s 46(b)). This would apply to any further subsidiaries of company C. In this example, company B is also a holding company in relation to company C, and company A is called the ‘ultimate holding com- pany’ in this chain (s 9). The Corporations Act uses the term ‘related body corporate’ in various places. This term applies to both a subsidiary and its holding company, and to subsidiaries of the holding company of another subsidiary (s 50). Although these provisions recognise that corporations can be linked by relations of control and influence, the legislation and the case law continue to take the individual company to be the primary focus of corporate law. This point is elaborated below at Section 4.65.05. While the primary focus of this chapter, and this book, is on the ‘standard’ types of corporation described above, it should be noted that the Corporations Act also contains sections that deal with specific corporate types. As examples, we briefly mention three of these: registrable Australian bodies, foreign companies, and corporate collective investment vehicles. The first two types are dealt with in ch 5B of the Act. The category of ‘registrable Australian body’ permits certain bodies corporate that are created outside the jurisdiction of the Corporations Act to carry on business in the jurisdiction. This includes incorporated associations and co-operatives. The definition of registrable Australian body in s 9 refers to either a body corporate or an unincorporated body that can sue or be sued, or hold property in the name of its secretary or an appointed officer. To carry on business within the jurisdiction of the Corporations Act, a body must make an application to be registered in the jurisdiction (s 601CA). The concept of carrying on business is defined to include ‘administering, managing, or otherwise dealing with, property situated in Australia’ (s 21(2)(b)) but it does not include the matters listed in s 21(3), such as merely holding property, maintaining a bank account, or completing an isolated transaction within a 31-day period. Second, a foreign company is a body corporate incorporated outside Australia or an unincorporated body that does not have its principal place of business in Australia (see the full definition in s 9). Such a company can only carry on business in Australia if it has applied for and been granted registration under pt 5B.2 div 2. The phrase ‘carrying on business’ has the same meaning as for registrable Australian bodies. Registration requires, among other things, the appointment of at least one natural person or company as a local agent who is responsible for the company’s compliance with the Corporations Act and is personally liable for penalties resulting from contraventions of the law (ss 601CF-601CJ). The third example is found in ch 8B of the Corporations Act, which provides for the creation of corporate collective investment vehicles (CCIVs). These sections were added in 2022 in response to a 2009 report that recommended the introduction of a form of collective investment that was more internationally recognised than the existing managed investment schemes in ch 5C of the Act“? A CCIV is a company limited by shares that operates as an ‘umbrella’ investment vehicle, managing distinct investment sub-funds. Chapter 8B modifies the application of other provisions in the Act in relation to CCIVs; for example, a CCIV can have only one director, and that must be a public company (s 1224). The different ways of classifying companies discussed above are expressly recognised in the Corporations Act. There are other important features of corporate life that are not fully recognised by legislation or common law.
## 4.65.05 Corporate groups

In the world of commerce and finance, the single, isolated company is not a common occurrence. Small trading concerns run by proprietary companies are likely to operate this way, but medium to large trading, financial or industrial concerns are likely to be run by complex groups of interrelated companies. These corporate groups can transcend national boundaries; ‘[t]he Transnational Corporation ..., often with diverse and integrated relationships with various national and foreign corporate entities, is typical of the modern corporate group‘“4 There is no generally accepted definition of what constitutes a corporate group, and there are no comprehensive figures on the number or extent of these structures in Australia. A study of Australian listed companies in 2007 found that nearly 88 per cent of the sample companies were structured as part of a corporate group45 The predominance of corporate groups prompts the question as to whether the group should be given some degree of formal recognition in corporate law. As discussed in Chapter 2, the doctrines and rules of Australian corporate law assume that each company exists and operates as an independent legal actor, with little regard being given to the social and economic context within which those companies operate. Neither Australian legislators nor the judiciary have taken comprehensive steps to recognise the existence of corporate groups. Professor Tom Hadden has commented that: The standard authority for the Australian position is found in Mason J's judgment in the 1976 High Court case of Walker v Wimborne,2 which involved a number of companies managed by common directors. Mason J referred to ‘the fundamental principles that each of the companies [in the case] was a separate and independent legal entity’“2 This and related cases are discussed in Chapter 3; they rely on an‘entity model’ of corporate organisation because they focus on the constituent entities in the group. It is an approach that ignores the ‘underlying unity of economic purpose, common personnel, common membership and control’ that may be found in a corporate group.4? As Rogers J remarked in Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd, the law on corporate groups ‘pays scant re- gard to commercial reality‘22 The entity model originated at a time when the economic world could be described as: a world of small firms, explored by a single trader or partnerships with few associates, assembling limited financial and labor resources, engaged in a local and one-product market, normally possessing no business relationships with commercial partners and holding no significant market share 21 Modern commercial practice is quite different and may be more accurately reflected in the ‘enterprise model’=2 The enterprise model has been influenced by economic perspectives: If the owners of an enterprise choose to fragment it into several constituent corporations— and we must assume that they act as rational investors in doing so—then they must believe that such a form of enterprise organization will maximize the return on their investment, given their acceptable level of risk ... [Because of this] the profitability of any one constituent corporation is largely irrelevant to them, except as it contributes to the overall effort Economists assume that investors and managers in the constituent companies within a group will be more concerned with the financial fortunes of the overall group than with those of the individual corporations. To achieve this goal, it may be necessary to favour the interests of some companies over others in which are associated by common or interlocking shareholding, allied to unified control or capacity to control’=® In addition to group structures determined by share ownership, we could consider ties created by contract and authority.*2 Contractual agreements between different entities may be used to allow for cooperation between these entities while retaining an ‘arms-length’ relationship between them. Control by the use of authority may result from share ownership, whether a majority or a minority shareholding which is sufficient to guarantee de facto or working control of a company. Alternatively, a creditor corporation (for example, a bank) may, as a condition of the loan, be in a position to dictate the business policy of a borrowing company, even without formal board representation. Ties of authority may not often be evident to people outside the group or by all of those inside the constituent corporations. Insiders and outsiders may have different perceptions about the boundaries and control of a particular group enterprise. The entity-based approach favoured by Australian courts has different effects upon the interests of creditors and shareholders of individual companies within a corporate group. Under the entity model, creditors who establish legal relations with a business run by a corporate group must do so via one of the constituent companies. A creditor may simply wish to do business with that particular company, having no dealings with the wider group at all. Regardless of the creditor's intentions, the fact that the debtor company is part of a larger group can have a significant impact on the risks associated with the credit transaction.*8 Because of the group context, these risks may be more difficult to ascertain than is the case when dealing with an isolated company. An example of these problems can be found in a case that dealt with the financial affairs of the Qintex group, a diversified conglomerate of approximately 170 companies with interests in media, television, holiday resorts and entertainment.22 Between 1988 and 1989, Qintex Australia Ltd (Qintex), an intermediate holding company in the group, borrowed sums totaling $185.5 million. In return, the company issued unsecured debentures. These debentures were issued under deeds drawn up by Qintex that also appointed ANZ Executors and Trustees Company Ltd (ANZ) to act as the trustee for the interests of the debenture-holders. In late 1989, Qintex defaulted on the loans, and ANZ (acting in the interests of the creditors) successfully obtained a court judgment of $110 million against the company. Qintex was not able to meet that court judgment, with the result that ANZ turned its attention to Qintex’s numerous subsidiaries. Relying on a clause in each of the trust deeds, ANZ instructed Qintex to obtain guarantees of the indebtedness to ANZ from about 90 of the Qintex wholly owned subsidiaries. This would then allow ANZ to seek payment from those companies. The Court refused to enforce the clauses in the deeds. The Court agreed with Qintex that to do otherwise would involve the subsidiary company managers in a breach of their duties to their companies: Under a different legal system it may be that each company in a group would be jointly and severally liable for the debts of every other company. But that is not the course the law has taken. The decision in Walker v Wimborne [citation omitted] is binding authority for considering each company in a group as a separate entity having assets and liabilities of its own that are distinct from those of all the others. The creditor who happens to deal with the only financially viable entity in the group may be exceptionally astute, or simply unusually fortunate; but, in either event, he is not in law liable to have his just claims defeated by arbitrary redistribution of assets or liabilities of his corporate debtor.S+ While the position enunciated in Walker v Wimborne has been confirmed on a number of occasions in Australian courts, there was judicial recognition of the problems it can create; in another case involving the Qintex group, Rogers J observed that: The ‘entity’ approach can work to the advantage of shareholders in one of the constituent corporations in a group. This was illustrated by the facts of Re Spargos Mining NL, which involved an action for oppression brought against the directors of Spargos Mining NL by one of its minority shareholders.©3 As the result of a takeover, the Spargos company had become part of an extensive web of corporations known as the Independent Resources Group. Companies within the group were controlled, directly or indirectly, by Independent Resources Ltd (IRL). This control was exercised through a combination of ‘close and common management links, as well as an interlocking web of complex mutual shareholdings‘ Shortly after the takeover, the Spargos board came to be dominated by representatives of the IRL board. At the time of the takeover, Spargos had been a company with considerable prospects; as described by Murray J, ‘it was at least on the threshold of becoming a major gold producer, operating its own mine and having other interests of some value‘® After being subsumed within the IRL group, the company’s situation deteriorated. Primarily, this was due to a policy whereby Spargos was used as a‘cash box’ to fund, directly or indirectly, various activities undertaken by other companies in the group. The directors of IRL, who also sat on the boards of many of the subsidiaries in the group, would decide to embark on a particular venture and then select another company within the IRL group to conduct the transaction. Spargos was then tied into the venture: either directly, by lending money to finance the acquisition; or indirectly, by supplying guarantees or security for loans taken out elsewhere. Spargos gained little in return, except, as the judge noted, ‘the benefit expressed in the philosophy that the transaction was thought to be of benefit to the IRL group as a whole‘* The financial situation of Spargos gradually declined. By the time the case was heard, the judge was able to note that Spargos had lost control of its main asset, the goldmine, in which it had by then been reduced to a 50 per cent interest.2 Under the previous equivalent of s 232 of the Corporations Act, the Court found this amounted to oppressive or unfair conduct against the members of the company, and ordered (among other things) the appointment of a new board. Murray J expressed his scepticism about the way in which the group had been run: One can understand that philosophy [of favouring group interests] within a group of corporate entities where there is a unity of control in the form of major shareholdings and representation upon the various Boards, but it is an approach which tends to take little account of the particular interests of individual companies and therefore of individual small shareholders in those corporate entities. The tendency is always to advance the interest of the majority shareholding which is common to a number of the corporate entities involved.8 A different approach was taken in Equiticorp Finance Ltd (in liq) v Bank of New Zealand2 The Equiticorp Group (‘the Group’) was comprised of companies loA different approach was taken in Equiticorp Finance Ltd (in liq) v Bank of New Zealand2 The Equiticorp Group (‘the Group’) was comprised of companies located in Australia and New Zealand. Hawkins was a director on the boards of many of the Group's companies and was described as the Group's chief executive with general authority for the conduct of the Group's business. The Bank of New Zealand (‘the Bank’) had provided a loan to one company within the Group. The loan was to be used to finance a takeover. There were difficulties in the course of the takeover, and the Bank became concerned about the level of its exposure to the Equiticorp Group. Seeking to restore credibility with the Bank, and under some pressure from Bank officers, Hawkins decided to use funds deposited with the Bank towards repaying the debt. Those funds had been deposited by two other corporations in the Group, and Hawkins was a director of one of those two corporations. Soon afterwards, those two corporations went into liquidation, and the liquidators claimed, among other things, that the use of the funds had been in breach of the director's fiduciary duties to those companies. In the New South Wales Court of Appeal, Clarke and Cripps JJA in the majority (Kirby P dissenting) held that there had not been any breach of duty. Their Honours recognised the difficulty that arises when the directors of one corporation in a group enter into a transaction on behalf of that corporation because they believe that the transaction is of benefit to the group as a whole. To reach a decision about such a situation, the majority judges applied a test that had been formulated in the United Kingdom case of Charterbridge Corporation Ltd v Lloyds Bank Ltd?°There, Pennycuick J had held that the proper test in the corporate group situation is: {w]hether an intelligent and honest man in the position of a director of the company concerned, could, in the whole of the existing circumstances, have reasonably believed that the transactions were for the benefit of the company. While they noted some reservations about this test,22 Clarke and Cripps JJA held that, in the circumstances, Hawkins and his fellow directors had justification for their belief that ‘the welfare of the group was intimately tied up with the welfare of the individual companies’2> The duties of directors in this type of situation is discussed in more detail in Chapter 12. For present purposes, the significance of the decision is that the test in Charterbridge allows directors of one company in a group to have regard to the wider interests of the group, rather than being solely and exclusively concerned with the interests of that individual company. Section 187 of the Corporations Act now provides that a director of a wholly owned subsidiary may act according to the best interests of the holding company, provided that: (1) the subsidiary’s constitution expressly authorises this (2) the director acts in good faith in the best interests of the holding company (3) the subsidiary is not insolvent at the time, and does not become insolvent because of the director's act. While they noted some reservations about this test,22 Clarke and Cripps JJA held that, in the circumstances, Hawkins and his fellow directors had justification The Corporations Act recognises the phenomenon of corporate groups in other areas as well. One of these is found in s 588V, specifying when a holding company may be liable for the insolvent trading of its subsidiary. Another is the area of corporate financial reporting. If financial disclosure is to be meaningful for members, creditors and regulators, it must be recognised that many businesses are run by group structures. To understand properly the financial position of a particular company, it will be necessary to consider the broader financial position of the group by reference to consolidated accounts for the entire group. However, the group will not necessarily be composed of strict holding-subsidiary company relationships. Ideally, the reporting requirements should be capable of producing meaningful financial disclosure for a flexibly constituted set of relationships between a range of business entities. The requirement to produce consolidated financial statements is set by the accounting standards (s 295(2)). The relevant standard (AASB 10 Consolidated Financial Statements) is structured around the concept of the control that one entity has over another. The concept of ‘control’ is defined broadly in terms of having power to direct activities that significantly affect the returns on investment. Where a company is required to prepare consolidated financial statements, then a director or officer of a controlled entity must give all information requested which is necessary to prepare those financial statements (s 323). Asimilar approach is taken in ch 2E of the Corporations Act which regulates financial transactions between a public company and its related parties. The term ‘related party’ includes an entity that controls the public company (s 228), and the term ‘entity’ includes bodies corporate, partnerships and other unincorporated bodies, trustees and individuals (s 9). Control, for this purpose, is defined in s 50AA(1): [A]n entity controls a second entity if the first entity has the capacity to determine the outcome of decisions about the second entity's financial and operating policies. The related-party provisions in ch 2E are discussed further in Chapter 13 of this book. In its 2000 report on corporate groups, the now-discontinued Companies and Securities Advisory Committee made a number of recommendations to reform the law concerning corporate groups/* including that:

+ the test of control in s SOAA should replace the holding/subsidiary company test found in s 46
+ awhollv owned corvorate aroun (that is. a parent comnanv with its wholly owned subsidiaries) should be able to ‘ont-in’ to be a consolidated cornorate
a wholly owned corporate group (that is, a parent company with its wholly owned subsidiaries) should be able to ‘opt-in’ to be a consolidated corporate group, thereby treated as a single legal structure (recognising the entity approach discussed above) the Corporations Act should permit directors of solvent partly-owned group companies to act in good faith and in the interests of the parent company (a parallel provision to s 187) wholly owned group companies should be able to merge with each other or with the parent company with the approval of the directors of all the merging companies. These recommendations have not been adopted.

## 4.65.10 Closely-held and widely-held companies

An obvious feature that can be used to distinguish between different companies is the size and distribution of shareholdings in a company and the nature of the relationship between the company’s members and the directors. The term ‘closely-held company’ is used to describe a company that has a small membership and in which there is a close association between the members and the directors. It may be that all of the members are involved in managing the company as directors or, in the case of many family companies, there may be other ties that bind the corporate participants. Many incorporated small businesses are closely held. At the other extreme, a ‘widely-held company’ is one with a diverse and usually large membership, most of whom will have little, if any, direct contact with the directors or managers. In these companies, the directors are practically, as well as legally, separated from members. Many listed public companies fall within this description. There are other possibilities falling between these extremes.25 The terms ‘closely-held’ and ‘widely-held’ are not necessarily synonymous with ‘proprietary’ and ‘public’ The latter terms indicate certain legal requirements and capacities which apply to different companies. The other terms tell us about the internal organisation of the corporation; however, these are broad descriptions, not precise definitions. Although Australian corporate law does distinguish between proprietary and public companies, it has been slow to recognise the implications of the closelyand widely-held distinction. Cases on the duties owed by directors have occasionally acknowledged that the size of a company and the proximity of relations between directors and members may be relevant to determining the nature of those duties.22 There is no clear indication that Australian courts recognise a distinct corporate law jurisprudence for closely-held companies.2&

## 4.65.10 Closely-held and widely-held companies

On rare occasions, evidence of close or partnership-like relations between incorporators has been acknowledged by the courts in deciding whether to wind up a company. These cases concern the exercise of the courts’ discretion to order that a company be wound up on the grounds that this is just and equitable? In Ebrahimi v Westbourne Galleries Ltd, the House of Lords ordered that a corporation, which ran a business previously run by a partnership, be wound up on this basis. This was because there was clear evidence that the relations of mutual confidence between the erstwhile partners had broken down. In the course of his judgment, Lord Wilberforce stated that: [A] limited company is more than a mere legal entity, with a personality in law of its own: ... there is room in company law for recognition of the fact that behind it, or amongst it, there are individuals, with rights, expectations and obligations inter se which are not necessarily submerged in the company structure.£! This approach towards so-called ‘quasi-partnership’ companies has been followed by some Australian courts.£2 We discuss this area of law in more detail in Chapters 13 and 14. It is only rarely that Australian corporate law explicitly recognises the particular issues presented by companies with different membership structures. In general, the law applies uniformly to companies of all types. This application of one set of laws to diverse corporate forms has long been questioned. One commentator remarked: Many laws, if not most, are appropriate to some types of corporation, but ill-fitting to others. If the laws governing corporations are to be improved, draftsmen must thoughtfully consider the application of each provision to corporations of widely different dimensions and characteristics. This observation applies not only to the statutes known as ‘corporation acts; but also to securities transfer laws, tax laws, and accounting rules.£

## 4.65.15 One-person companies

It is possible to incorporate a proprietary company with one person as the sole director and the sole shareholder, creating what might be called the ultimate in closely-held corporations. While the idea of a one-person company seems at odds with the idea of a company as a form of association, there are at least two rationales for allowing one-person incorporations. First, it avoids the artificiality of involving other persons in the company simply to satisfy formal incorporation requirements. This can be of particular benefit to women; when these reforms were introduced in the mid-1990s, the Attorney-General, Michael Lavarch, pointed to research showing that the previous minimum requirement of two people had often led ‘to women becoming directors of companies controlled by their spouse in which they do not play any meaningful role. This [could] expose these women to the legal liabilities of a company director, without them having any influence over the operation of the company:®4 More recent research on family violence and economic abuse indicates, however, that despite these reforms women continue to be coerced into becoming co-directors.£5 The second rationale is that allowing the incorporation of one-person com-

## 4.65.15 One-person companies

It is possible to incorporate a proprietary company with one person as the sole director and the sole shareholder, creating what might be called the ultimate in closely-held corporations. While the idea of a one-person company seems at odds with the idea of a company as a form of association, there are at least two rationales for allowing one-person incorporations. First, it avoids the artificiality of involving other persons in the company simply to satisfy formal incorporation requirements. This can be of particular benefit to women; when these reforms were introduced in the mid-1990s, the Attorney-General, Michael Lavarch, pointed to research showing that the previous minimum requirement of two people had often led ‘to women becoming directors of companies controlled by their spouse in which they do not play any meaningful role. This [could] expose these women to the legal liabilities of a company director, without them having any influence over the operation of the company:®4 More recent research on family violence and economic abuse indicates, however, that despite these reforms women continue to be coerced into becoming co-directors.85 The second rationale is that allowing the incorporation of one-person com- panies offers the protection and benefits of incorporation to sole traders. This type of company is generally subject to the same general rules and principles that apply to other companies under the Corporations Act, although it does receive specialised treatment on some matters.2° The following points summarise the main specialised provisions: if the sole director/shareholder dies, becomes mentally incapacitated or bankrupt, then the person's personal representative or trustee (as appropriate) may appoint another person or themselves as director (ss 201F(2)-(3)) the director can exercise all powers of the company except those which the Corporations Act, or the company’s constitution (if there is one) allocate to the general meeting (s 198E) a director's resolution or declaration is passed by recording it in the company’s minute books and signing the record (s 248B) amember’s resolution is passed by the member recording the resolution and signing the record in the company’s minute books (s 249B). One such resolution concerns the remuneration paid to the person as director (s 202C) the director can appoint another director by recording and signing the appointment in the company records (s 201F(1)). Many factors can influence the decision to incorporate and the choice of a particular form of incorporation. Some of these factors have been mentioned: does the business or association operate on a profit-making or non-profit basis? From what sources does the business intend to raise finance? What existing relations, if any, does the business or association have with other entities? In some cases, the answers will compel a particular form of incorporation. For example, if the intention is to raise finance from the investing public, then incorporation as a public company will be necessary. One factor in deciding whether to incorporate in any form is the requirement in s 115 of the Corporations Act. This section prohibits the formation of a partnership or association that has the object of acquiring gain for itself or its members and consists of more than 20 persons unless it is incorporated in some form. The section permits the Corporations Regulations to specify higher maximum memberships for certain professional partnerships and associations. The membership limit for professional partnerships is: accountants 1,000; legal practitioners 400; architects, pharmaceutical chemists or veterinary surgeons 100; and actuaries, medical practitioners, patent or trademark attorneys, sharebrokers or stockbrokers 50.22 The original rationale for this restriction was the wish ‘to prevent the mischief arising from large trading undertakings being carried on by large fluctuating bodies, so that persons dealing with them did not know with whom they were contracting, and so might be put to great difficulty and expense’®2 Beyond this mandatory requirement, it is not possible to list definitively the factors which should be taken into account in the decision to incorporate or the choice of a particular corporate form. Experience suggests that the following factors may be the more prominent: Limited liability of members: this is the most obvious advantage to be gained by incorporation. However, in practice, the advantages may be eroded; it is common for major finance creditors to require the directors of small companies to give personal guarantees for loans to the company. Trade creditors are less likely to use this device, either because they lack bargaining power or because the sums involved are too small. The advantage of limited liability will often be confined in application to claims by trade creditors or so-called involuntary creditors (such as tort victims). Capacity to issue certain types of financial security in return for capital or loans: unlike unincorporated forms of business association such as partnerships, a company has the capacity to issue certain types of financial instruments and security charges. These are listed in s 124 of the Corporations Act and include shares, debentures, and circulating security interests. This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8. Taxation: given the variety of situations within which a company can operate, it is difficult to be categorical about the taxation advantages of incorporation. There is some evidence that taxation is a major factor in decisions to incorporate small businesses.22 In comparison with other forms of business association, corporations enjoy beneficial marginal rates of income tax. There are disadvantages to incorporation, although these will vary depending on the type of company. The principal disadvantage which may be perceived by incorporators is the cost of maintaining the legal structure and complying with the continuing regulatory requirements. This cost can arise from the obligations to maintain registers, prepare accounts, hold annual general meetings, and submit annual returns. Fewer direct costs may also be incurred, particularly in widely-held companies due to the separation between shareholders and managers. Economists argue that shareholders face costs in monitoring the performance of managers, while the managers bear the cost of convincing shareholders that their interests are being catered for. This is discussed in Chapter 2. This chapter explained the formal process by which a company comes into existence through registration under the Corporations Act. Against the backdrop of other types of corporate entity, this chapter described the range of company structures available under the Corporations Act, focusing on the three ways in which companies can be categorised: in terms of their proprietary or public status; according to how they structure the liability of their members; and by reference to their relationship to other companies. This chapter examined the important role of corporate groups, as well as the difference between closely-held (and one-person) and widely-held companies. Corporate structures have proven to be remarkably adaptable to the forces of social and economic change since the nineteenth century. Today, the globalisation of trade, the regionalisation of world markets, restructured political alliances, and acceptance of the involvement of organised business and labour in political governance all provide fertile ground for the diversified application of company forms. Law students and practitioners of corporate law must be aware of the range of situations and contexts within which companies operate. This is necessary to avoid overly simple assumptions about the capacity of corporate law to facilitate and regulate company conduct. It is appropriate to conclude with a related point. Corporate law tells us only some things about companies. Each company has a number of dimensions: these include the legal dimension (which has been the focus of this chapter), the economic/financial dimension, and the organisational dimension (for example, management structures and industrial relations). A company is‘a conglomeration of different relationships and practices—linked to each other, but ina variety of ways which may be complementary or contradictory’2" 1 Section 9 makes two clarifying points about the term ‘body corporate’ but does not offer a full definition. 2 Oates v Consolidated Capital Services Ltd (2009) 76 NSWLR 69. 3 Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Bank of Western Australia (1995) 61 FCR 407, 429. 4 sir William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England (Garland Publishing, 1978) vol 1, 469. See also S Stoljar, Groups and Entities: An Inquiry into Corporate Theory (ANU Press, 1973) ch 9. 5 Corporations Regulations 2001 (Cth) reg 2B.6.01, sch 6. £A proprietary company is not required to have a secretary (s 204A(1)). Z Section 201A(1A) specifies a minimum of two directors for a proprietary company when it has crowd-sourced funding (CSF) shareholders. This is also known as ‘equity crowdfunding’ and is discussed in Chapter 9. 8 See Australian Securities and Investments Commission, Steps to register a company (Information Sheet 61, 2024) https://asic.gov.au/for-business/registering-a-company/stepsto-register-a-company/. 2 Australian Securities Commission v SIB Resources NL (1991) 30 FCR 221 found that, asa result of the Commission's successful challenge to the validity of incorporation, the company should be wound up on the application of the Commission or the Attorney-General. 12 Gramophone & Typewriter Ltd v Stanley [1908] 2 KB 89, 96-7 (Cozens-Hardy MR). 11 JK Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Penguin, 1970) 82-3. 12 Associations Incorporation Act 1991 (ACT); Associations Incorporation Act 2009 (NSW); Associations Act 2003 (NT); Associations Incorporation Act 1981 (QId); Associations Incorporation Act 1985 (SA); Associations Incorporation Act 1964 (Tas); Associations Incorporation Reform Act 2012 (Vic); Associations Incorporation Act 2015 (WA). 13 A charity can incorporate under this legislation or may instead choose an unincorporated structure (such as a trust) or incorporate under the Corporations Act (in which case, certain exemptions from provisions in the Corporations Act may apply: see s 111L). 14 In NSW, income and asset thresholds are used to determine whether an association's trading activities continue to meet the legislation’s objects. 18 public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (Cth); Territory Owned Corporations Act 1990 (ACT); State Owned Corporations Act 1989 (NSW); Government Owned Corporations Act 2001 (NT); Government Owned Corporations Act 1993 (Qld); Government Business Enterprises (Competition) Act 1996 (SA); Government Business Enterprises Act 1995 (Tas); State Trading Concerns Act 1916 (WA); State Owned Enterprises Act 1992 (Vic). 16 Companies Act 2006 (UK) s 4. 42 Re Dungowan Manly Pty Ltd (In liq) (2017) 124 ACSR 218. 18 However, s 201A(1A) specifies a minimum of two directors for a proprietary company when it has crowd-sourced funding (CSF) shareholders. This is also known as‘equity crowdfunding’ and is discussed in Chapter 9. 18 However, ss 1224 and 1224F specify that the sole director of a company that is a corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV) must be a public company. See the description of CCIVs at Section 4.60. 20 Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Ltd v Antico (1995) 38 NSWLR 290.

21 if a proprietary company does engage in activity which requires lodgement of a prospectus, then ASIC may require the company to change to a public company under s 165. 22 See, eg, Companies and Securities Advisory Committee, Report on an Enhanced Statutory Disclosure System (Report, September 1991) 30. 23 See Chapter 17 regarding the debate about mandatory disclosure.

24 See Board of Trade, Report of the Company Law Committee (Cmnd 1749, 1962) [60]. 25 Note that these amounts are those prescribed by the Corporations Regulations 2001, as permitted by s 45A(3). Note, too, that the criteria apply to the company and to any entities it controls. 26 according to data from the Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman‘ office, in June 2023, 97.3 per cent of Australian businesses had between 0-19 employees: see ‘Number of Small Businesses in Australia, Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman (Web Page) <https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/small-businessdata-portal/number-small-businesses-australia>. 22 In this context, a pre-emption right means that existing shareholders must be offered the new shares first before they are then offered to potential new shareholders. One aim of these pre-emptive rights is to preserve existing voting and control patterns in the company. 28 Until 1995, it was mandatory for a proprietary company to include a clause in its constitution that restricted the right of members to transfer their shares. The replaceable rule in s 1072G makes this optional. 2 A special resolution is one that meets the requirements in s 250MA, including that it must be passed by at least 75 per cent of the votes cast by members who are entitled to vote on the resolution.
