# Chapter 7

Decision-making, meetings and reporting 2.05 Introduction 7.10 Decision-making

## 7.10.05 Application of the division of powers 7.15 Members’

## 7.15.05 Members’ powers in the general meeting

## 7.15.10 Members’ powers to make decisions under the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).

## 7.15.15 Additional rights under the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)

## 7.15.20 Members’ reserve powers 7.20 The board of directors

## 7.20.05 Types of directors

## 7.20.10 The role of the board 7.25 Where members disagree with a decision of the directors 7.30 Meetings

## 7.30.05 Members’ meetings

## 7.30.10 Directors’ meetings 7.35 Decision-making in single director/shareholder companies 7.40 Reporting and disclosure

## 7.40.05 Members’ information

## 7.40.10 Information provided to ASIC 7.45 Financial reporting

## 7.45.05 Financial records

## 7.45.10 Financial reports 7.50 Failure to comply 7.55 Summary @ Loading. Please wait

As discussed in earlier chapters, a company has the legal powers and capacity of an individual, in addition to any specific powers conferred by law (s 124). The two key decision-making organs that can act as the company in exercising these powers are the board of directors and the members in general meeting. The general law and the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) divide the company’s powers and responsibilities between these two groups. This chapter discusses this division of powers. It also discusses how meetings of members and directors are held, and the requirements on companies to prepare and disclose key information, including financial reports. OC) Loading. Please wait There are many long- and short-term decisions that need to be made within companies. The responsibility for making these decisions is divided between the board of directors and the members in general meeting. The exception to this is when a company is in financial difficulty and must appoint a receiver or liquidator. In reality, many day-to-day decisions will be made by managers and other employees within a company acting under delegation from the board. Provided a decision is properly made, the board and shareholders in general meeting act as the company when making decisions The division of power between the board and the members in general meeting is determined by looking at the company’s constitution and at the relevant sections of the Corporations Act. As discussed in Chapter 4, the constitution contains the rules on the internal workings of a company. Under the replaceable rule contained in s 198A, or a similar provision contained in the company’s constitution, the power to manage the business of a company is vested in the board of directors or their delegate? This power is broad and includes all areas of decision-making not reserved specifically for members in general meeting. Section 198A(2) provides that ‘the directors may exercise all of the powers of the company except any powers that [the Corporations Act] or the company’s constitution (if any) requires the company to exercise in general meeting’ It is possible for companies to alter this balance of power by including different provisions in the corporate constitution; however, most companies adopt similar provisions to s 198A.

## 7.10.05 Application of the di' in of powers

In reality, this model is an oversimplification of how decisions are made. For example, the size and complexity of the operations of large public companies means that the board is rarely able to exercise its full power to manage the company. Instead, it must delegate much of this power to senior managers The board's role then becomes one of monitoring those managers who have delegated authority to run the business or parts of it. As noted by Rogers CJ in AWA Ltd v Daniels,4‘many companies today are too big to be supervised and administered by a Board of Directors except in relation to matters of high policy’> His Honour continued: ‘The board of a large public corporation cannot manage the corporation’s day to day business. That function must by business necessity be left to the corporation's executives. If the director of a large public corporation were to be immersed in the details of the day to day operations the director would be incapable of taking more abstract, important decisions at board level£ The position in small proprietary companies is also not as neat in practice as suggested by the legal division of powers. Where the shareholders and directors of a company are the same people, it can be impractical and artificial to hold separate board and members’ meetings. However, in the absence of a provision in the constitution altering the balance of power, the law maintains this formal separation of powers. Not surprisingly, this can result in confusion for the indi- viduals involved in a small company. Added to this is the fact that each decision-making organ within a company is sovereign within their area of power. In other words, neither group can interfere with or direct the other as to how to exercise their powers. Members cannot order or seek to influence directors in their decisions, and the directors cannot interfere with the decision-making of members. This can lead to tensions between shareholders and directors, particularly where there are different views as to how a company should be managed.2 While shareholders have a financial interest in a company, in law their ability to influence management is limited. In large public companies this can result in shareholders taking action to express their views through ‘shareholder activism’: defined as any ‘action taken by shareholders to bring about change ina company or influence its behaviour’? Before considering these issues, we must first discuss the powers allocated to the members and the board. O Loading. Please wait The term ‘members’ includes shareholders in a company limited by shares, members of a company limited by guarantee, and members of an unlimited company. As discussed below, members hold important rights in a company. Chapter 5 discussed members’ rights to enforce the corporate constitution via contract. The rights granted to members through the constitution are called ‘personal rights’ In this chapter, we discuss the rights members have to act collectively in the general meeting and to make decisions as the company. We discuss how members’ meetings are held. In Chapter 14, we discuss members’ statutory rights, including the right to take legal action on behalf of the company (called ‘derivative rights’); to take legal action for oppressive, unfairly discriminatory and unfairly prejudicial conduct; and to apply to have the company wound up. There are often different types of members in companies, particularly large companies. Some are small- to medium-sized investors looking to achieve a return on their investment in the form of dividends and/or an increase in the value of the shares on sale. These investors generally rely on general meetings and information made public throughout the year to stay up to date on the company’s activities. Other members include institutional investors such as fund managers, superannuation/pension funds (industry, government or corporate), life companies, universities, and banks. These investors may have sufficiently large shareholdings to be able to meet with executives of a company to discuss its performance outside of members’ meetings. This can offer large investors an opportunity to inform the board of their views on the company’s performance and receive information on its future progress and direction.

## 7.15.05 Members’ powers in the general meeting

As indicated above, directors are usually granted the broad power to manage a company under the Corporations Act (s 198A) or the company’s constitution. In contrast, members are given specific decision-making powers under the Corporations Act, the constitution, and the general law. Shareholders in companies listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) must be given additional rights via the company constitution to vote on a range of issues including when the company makes a significant change to its activities or its main undertaking is sold.12 An example of a provision from a public company’s constitution conferring such power on the board might be as follows: ‘The Directors are responsible for managing the business of the company and may exercise to the exclusion of the members in general meeting all the powers which are not required by the Corporations Act, by the Listing Rules or by this Constitution to be exercised by the members in general meeting. As this mock provision demonstrates, the board of directors is the most powerful decision-making body in a company as it is able to exercise all the powers not expressly granted to the members (see replaceable rule s 198A(2)). Although members are given rights in general meeting, including the right to appoint the directors, these rights are limited to the areas specifically allocated to them in law. Indeed, many of the rights relate to structural or procedural issues, such as adopting or amending the corporate constitution; changing the company from one type to another; varying the rights attached to the company’s shares; appointing and removing the directors and auditor; approving related party transactions; and commencing a members’ voluntary winding up.

## 7.15.10 Members’ powers to make deci:
ions under the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) Adopting or amending the constitution As discussed in Chapter 5, any changes to the company’s constitution must be approved by a special resolution of the members in a general meeting (s 136(2)). A constitution may stipulate additional conditions to be met for an amendment to the constitution but cannot take this power away from members (s 136(4)). The members must agree if a company wants to adopt a constitution on or after registration. If the constitution is adopted on registration, all the initial members must consent. If a company wants to adopt a constitution after registration, this must be approved by a special resolution of the members in a general meeting (s 136(1)). Either the directors or the members can propose the adoption of, or changes to, the constitution. Changing the company’s name or type If a company wishes to change its name, this must be approved by a special resolution of the members in a general meeting (s 157). Similarly, if the type of company changes (for example, a proprietary company is to change to a public company), this must be approved by a special resolution of the members in a general meetina (s 162). The reauirements of s 163 (applvina to ASIC for a chanae of tvpe) and s 164 (ASIC’s role in relation to a chanae of tvoe) must also be Appointing the directors Whether members, the board, or both have the power to appoint directors depends on the terms of the company’s constitution. The replaceable rule ins 201G provides that the members may appoint a director via an ordinary resolution. Section 201H(1) (a replaceable rule) provides that, in a proprietary company, the directors may appoint a director, but that appointment must be confirmed by an ordinary resolution of the members in a general meeting passed within two months of the director's appointment (s 201H(2)). In a public company, the directors may appoint an additional director, and that appointment must also be confirmed by an ordinary resolution passed by the members at the company’s next annual general meeting (s 201H(3)). If an appointment is not confirmed as required in either a proprietary or a public company, the person ceases to be a director. Sometimes, the constitution of a proprietary company will vary the replaceable rules and provide that only the board or a governing director has the power to appoint a director. On the face of it, s 201G (and any similar provision in a constitution) grants a powerful right to members to determine who will manage and run the company. In practice, the power of directors to appoint an additional director under s 201H may increase the likelihood that the members will approve that appointment. This can lead to a situation where the board has indirect control over the appointment of new directors. As Berle and Means recognised over 90 years ago, where the shareholding in a company is dispersed and attendance at meetings is limited, it is unlikely that any shareholder or group of shareholders will control the general meeting This, in combination with the rules on proxy voting (discussed below), can result in members’ approval of the appointment of a director being ‘almost automatic‘!2 Section 201E reduces the risk of members in a public company being asked to vote on or approve the appointment of two more directors in one resolution. It provides that such a resolution cannot be passed unless the form of the resolution has previously been agreed to by the meeting without any vote being cast against it. Any non-conforming resolution appointing directors is void. Removing the directors The constitution will often contain provisions on the retirement of directors and the circumstances in which they will cease to hold office. In a proprietary company, the replaceable rule in s 203C gives the power to remove a director to the members in a general meeting. In some proprietary companies, this provision is varied and the constitution allocates the power to the board or to a governing director, or requires a unanimous decision of a general meeting to remove a director. Ina public company, any resolution or request or notice that seeks to remove a director from office or requires them to vacate their office is void to the extent it contains such a request (s 203E). Under s 203D, the power to remove a director is given to the members in general meeting. This section is not a replaceable rule and operates despite anything to the contrary in the company’s constitution, any agreement between the company and the director, or any agreement between all or any of the members and the director. Notice of a proposed resolution by the members to remove a director must be given to the company at least two months before the meeting is held (s 203D(2)). The company must give the relevant director a copy of the notice as soon as practicable after it is received (s 203D(3)). The director is then entitled to put their case to the members via a written statement which the company must circulate and by speaking to the resolution at the meeting (s 203D(4)). It is possible to remove more than one director in a single resolution. As directors will often be appointed via contract, their removal by the members may amount to a breach of contract. This may give a director the right to sue for damages.14 Varying the rights attached to shares As discussed in Chapter 8, the directors may seek to vary or cancel the rights attaching to shares. These rights include the right to vote, the right to receive a dividend, and rights on winding up. If such a variation is proposed, it will need to be approved by the members before it is effective. Whether such approval is required will depend on whether the constitution contains a provision setting out a procedure for varying class rights. If it does, then this procedure must be followed. If it does not, then under s 246B(2) the variation must be approved by a special resolution of the general meeting and a special resolution, or the consent in writing, of at least 75 per cent of the votes of the members whose rights are being affected. De ns related to share capital Members’ approval is required for a number of issues related to share capital. These are discussed further in Chapter 8 and include:

+ anissue of shares that amounts to a variation of class rights of the existing shareholders!= * consolidating or subdividing the company’s shares!® Varying the rights attached to shares Decisions related to share capital

Members’ approval is required for a number of issues related to share capital. These are discussed further in Chapter 8 and include: an issue of shares that amounts to a variation of class rights of the existing shareholders!> a share issue by a publicly listed company that involves increasing the company’s issued capital by more than 15 per cent in a year, or a share issue to a director or senior executive!2 a share buy-back under an employee share scheme, an on-market offer, an equal access scheme that involves the purchase of more than 10 per cent of the company’s issued capital in a 12-month period and a selective buy-back!8 a reduction of share capital provided it is fair and reasonable to the members as a whole and does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its creditors!? the provision of financial assistance to a person or entity to purchase shares in the company or its holding company where assistance materially prejudices the interests of the company, its shareholders or the company’s ability to pay its creditors.22 Disclosure and voting on directors’ remuneration Public pressure for disclosure and accountability of directors in relation to their remuneration packages has led to various amendments to the Corporations Act. In 1998, the Company Law Review Act 1998 (Cth) introduced a requirement for directors of listed companies to include a remuneration report in their annual directors’ report. The remuneration report must include a discussion of the board's policy on the nature and amount of remuneration paid to key management personnel, the relationship of such policy to the company’s performance, and the nature and amount of each element of the remuneration package (s 300A). Section 300A was further amended in 2004 to require disclosure on any part of a remuneration package that is dependent on a director or manager satisfying performance criteria, and of any options forming part of a remuneration package! At the same time, ss 250S and 250R were introduced. Section 250S requires the person chairing the annual general meeting of a listed company to allow a reasonable opportunity for the members to ask questions about or make comments upon the directors’ remuneration report. Section 250R gives members a right to vote on the adoption of the remuneration report. While this vote is advisory only, and does not bind the company or the directors (ss 250R(2), (3), it is designed to ‘facilitate more active involvement by shareholders and improve the accountability of directors for decisions regarding remuneration’22 Any key management personnel whose remuneration is dealt with in the report, or any closely related party of such a person, is not able to vote on the resolution (s 250R(4)). In 2011, the ‘two strikes rule’ was introduced.23 Under this rule, if the advisory vote on the remuneration report in a publicly listed company receives a‘no’ vote from 25 per cent or more of the votes cast, the next remuneration report must include an explanation of the directors’ proposed action in response to that result, or an explanation of why the directors have not taken any action“ If this subsequent remuneration report receives a similar negative vote of 25 per cent or more, the members must vote at the same meeting on whether there should be a resolution requiring all the directors of the company to stand

* areduction of share capital provided it is fair and reasonable to the members as a whole and does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its
creditors!? Disclosure and voting on directors’ remuneration of the votes cast, the company must, within 90 days, hold a special meeting for members to elect new directors.2> In addition to the rights set out above, individual members or groups of members are granted further rights under the Corporations Act, including: ss 249D and 249N: the power to convene meetings and to request resolutions (discussed further below) s 249P the right to require the company to distribute a statement to all members prior to a general meeting s 250S: the right to ask questions or make comments at the annual general meeting s 314: the right to receive a copy of the company’s financial report (discussed further below) s 173(2): the right to inspect the company’s registers free of charge (discussed in Chapter 14) s 461: the right to apply to wind up the company (discussed in Chapters 14 and 16) ss 236 and 237: the right to bring an action for oppression or a statutory derivative action (discussed in Chapter 14) $ 1324: the right to apply for an injunction in situations to restrain breaches of the Corporations Act (discussed in Chapter 14).

## 7.15.20 Members’ reserve powers

In limited circumstances, where the board cannot act on a matter within its powers the members in general meeting can intervene under their reserve powers. The circumstances in which this can be done are rare, and there are few cases discussing this power. One example of this power is where the board is in deadlock and is incapable of making a decision. This situation arose in Barron v Potter,2® where the Court held that ‘if directors having certain powers are unable or unwilling to exercise them ... there must be some power in a company to do itself that which under other circumstances would otherwise be done’22 Section 195(4) provides that members of a public company may, in general meeting, deal with an issue where the board of directors lack a quorum. In Massey v Wales,?8 the facts involved two directors of a company who had fallen out with each other. One director convened a board meeting to appoint an additional director that result, or an explanation of why the directors have not taken any action.“ If this subsequent remuneration report receives a similar negative vote of 25 per cent or more, the members must vote at the same meeting on whether there should be a resolution requiring all the directors of the company to stand for re-election. If this resolution then receives more than 50 per cent s 1324: the right to apply for an injunction in situations to restrain breaches of the Corporations Act (discussed in Chapter 14).
## 7.15.20 Members’ reserve powers
without telling the other director. That director then joined with the new director to institute legal proceedings in the name of the company—a decision that was later ratified at a shareholders’ meeting. The issue before the Court was whether the decision at the shareholders’ meeting was valid. Hodgson JA in the Supreme Court of New South Wales held that the ratification was not valid as it involved an exercise of management power and the shareholders could not exercise such powers. He rejected the view that shareholders have unlimited reserve powers when the board is deadlocked. Instead, he found that in such circumstances the board is only permitted to appoint new directors in order to resolve the deadlock and ensure that the board can function again. Adifferent issue arises where the members in general meeting ratify a breach of duty by the directors. The power to ratify a breach arises because members are the beneficiaries of these duties. This issue is discussed further in Chapters 10 and 13.22 The board of directors is the more powerful of the two groups that can act as the company, as they have the widest decision-making authority. Unless the board has delegated power or authority to an individual or a group (such as a managing director or committee), directors must make decisions collectively. As noted by Dawson J in Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General,2°'{dlirectors can act only collectively as a board and the function of an individual director is to participate in decisions of the board’2" This means that board meetings are an important part of the life of a company. As discussed in Chapter 4, a proprietary company must have at least one director who must ordinarily reside in Australia (ss 201A, 201BB). A public company must have at least three directors, two of whom ordinarily reside in Australia (s 201A). Only a natural person (not a company or other legal entity) can be a director and the person must be over 18 years of age. A public company must have at least one secretary, while a proprietary company is not required to have a secretary (s 204A). A director can be appointed at the time a company is registered or later according to ss 117, 201G and 201H. The term of office is normally stated in the constitution. For a company listed on the ASX, no director, except the managing director, can hold office for more than three years without standing for re-election22

## 7.20.05 Types of directors

There are two types of directors: executive and non-executive. Executive directors are employees of the company. They also have a seat on the board. Nonexecutive directors are appointed from outside the company. The category of non-executive director includes independent directors (discussed further below). All directors have the same responsibilities and duties regardless of their title, unless something different is provided for in the constitution. Executive directors Executive directors are employees of the company. They bring to the board knowledge of the workings of the company. For example, in large public companies, members of the senior management team such as the Chief Executive Officer (‘CEO’), Chief Financial Officer (‘CFO’) and Chief Operations Officer (‘COO’) will often be directors and on the board. Executive directors have a dual legal relationship with the company: one as a director that carries fiduciary obligations (discussed further in Chapter 13) and the other as an employee under a contract of service. Precisely how these different relationships affect the duties they owe as directors is considered in Chapters 11-13. Managing director or Chief Executive Officer Amanaging director is responsible for the company’s day-to-day business. In a large public company, they oversee the senior management of the company. The replaceable rules in ss 201J and 198C provide that directors may appoint one or more directors to be a managing director, and then confer on that person any powers that can be exercised by the board. In a large company, the managing director is often called the CEO. They serve the vital function of supervising the management team in the company and reporting to the board on the business of the company. Chief Financial Officer The CFO is responsible for managing the financial position of the company. This includes managing financial risks, undertaking financial planning, keeping all necessary financial records up to date and in order, and reporting to the CEO and the board. CFOs are often appointed to the board as executive directors and are covered by the definition of an ‘officer’ in s 9 of the Corporations Act. It is increasingly common for CFOs in large public companies to be involved in shaping the overall strategy and direction of the company. Chief Operations Officer The COO oversees the business operations of the company. The COO reports to the CEO and often to the board. They will often be the ‘second-in-command’ after the CEO. Bennett and Miles note that the role of the COO is hard to define:# When you start to examine COOs as a class, one thing immediately becomes clear: there are almost no constants. People with very different backgrounds ascend to the role and succeed in it. ... [T]here is no single agreed-upon description of what the job entails or even what it’s called. Often, companies turn responsibility for all areas of operations over to the COO ... [including] production, marketing and sales, and research and development# The role of the chairperson is to run the meeting and ensure appropriate procedures are followed. This includes finalising the agenda; arranging for management to provide the necessary information to the board; ensuring the board addresses each item on the agenda; assisting the board to reach consensus on matters under discussion; putting questions to the meeting; declaring resolutions to be carried or defeated; asking for general business; and closing the meeting.2 In large public companies, the chairperson commonly communicates between the board and the CEO between meetings, and is the public face of the company in terms of external communications.8 With listed companies, the ASX Corporate Governance Council recommends that the roles of chairperson and CEO are not exercised by the same person22 In Colorado Constructions Pty Ltd v Platus, Street J noted it was ‘an indispensable part of any meeting that a chairman [sic] should be appointed and should occupy the chair. In the absence of some person ... the meeting is unable to proceed to business’42 In large public companies, it has become increasingly common for the chairperson to be an independent director“! This is because the chairperson carries heightened governance responsibilities as noted by Rogers CJ in AWA Ltd v Daniels:42 ‘The chairman [sic] is responsible to a greater extent than any other director for the performance of the board as a whole and each member of it. The chairman has the primary responsibility for selecting matters and documents to be brought to the board's attention, for formulating the policy of the board and promoting the position of the company. Non-executive directors Non-executive directors are directors who are not involved in the daily management of the company and are not employed by the company. They are sometimes referred to as ‘outside directors: A non-executive director may be characterised as an independent director depending upon the extent of their connections with the company. Some of the advantages of non-executive directors are that they bring outside knowledge to the board and can play an oversight role in respect of executive directors. However, a risk for non-executive directors is they must rely on the information provided to them by management in making their decisions. Independent directors Independent directors have become increasingly important to companies in Australia. A sign of good corporate governance is for large boards to have a majority of independent directors. Recommendation 2.1 of the ASX Corporate Governance Council's Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations suggests a majority of the board of a listed company should be comprised of independent directors, being non-executive directors who are not a member of management and who are free from ‘any business or other relationship that could materially interfere (or could reasonably be perceived to materially interfere) with the independent exercise of that director's judgment’4? The Recommendations provide guidance on factors relevant to assessing the independence of a director. These include whether the person: is or has been employed in an executive capacity by the company or any of its related entities within the last three years is or has been a partner, director or senior employee of a provider of material professional services to the company or any of its subsidiaries within the last three years is or has been in a material business relationship (for example, as a supplier or customer) with the company or any of its subsidiaries, or an officer of, or otherwise associated with, someone with such a relationship, within the last three years is, represents, or is or has been within the last three years an officer or employee of, or professional adviser to, a substantial holder has close personal ties with any person who falls within any of the categories described above.“4 In each case, the materiality of the interest, position or relationship will need to be assessed by the board to determine whether it might interfere, or be seen to interfere, with the director's capacity to bring an independent judgment to bear on issues before the board and to act in the company’s best interests“ It is suggested in the Recommendations that each listed company identify in its annual report which directors are independent and why.4¢ It is also suggested that the board regularly assess whether the non-executive directors remain independent.42 The term ‘independent director’ is used interchangeably with ‘non-executive director; although this is not correct. A director can be a non-executive director, but not be independent due to the factors listed above. An executive director can, clearly, never be independent. Naminoo diractare Independent directors Nominee directors Nominee directors are appointed to the board to represent a specific set of interests, such as those of a major shareholder, a holding company, a major creditor or employees. In Levin v Clark,48 the plaintiff purchased a majority interest in a company. The vendor of the shares took a mortgage from the plaintiff in the context of assisting the purchaser with payment monies. The Articles of Association of the company provided for the appointment of two governing directors. It was agreed that the two people occupying these positions would remain in office after the company was sold but were only to exercise their powers if the purchaser defaulted under their mortgage to the vendor. When the plaintiff did default, the two directors attempted to exercise their powers in the vendor's interest. The plaintiff argued that they had breached their fiduciary duty by acting in the interests of the mortgagee rather than the company as a whole. Jacobs J rejected this argument: It is of course correct to state as a general principle that directors must act in the interests of the company. There is no necessity to refer to the large body of authority which supports this as a general proposition. However, that leaves open the question in each case—what is the interest of the company? It is not uncommon for a director to be appointed to a board of directors in order to represent an interest outside the company—a mortgagee or other trader or a particular shareholder. It may be in the interests of the company that there be upon its board of directors one who will represent these other interests and who will be acting solely in the interests of such a third party and who may in that way be properly regarded as acting in the interests of the company as a whole. To argue that a director particularly appointed for the purpose of representing the interests of a third party cannot lawfully act solely in the interests of that third party, is in my view to apply the broad principle, governing the fiduciary duty of directors, to a particular situation, where the breadth of the fiduciary duty has been narrowed by agreement amongst the body of shareholders. As this case indicates, the appointment of a nominee director can result in conflicts of interest. While their appointment is done to provide representation for a particular interest group at the board level, legally the nominee directors are required to act in the best interests of the company. As Jacobs J indicated above, this involves balancing the expectations of the person or entity that has appointed them with their legal obligation to act in the best interests of the company on whose board they sit. In the absence of agreement to the contrary, as existed in Levin's case, if an actual conflict of interest occurs, the nominee As this case indicates, the appointment of a nominee director can result in conflicts of interest. While their appointment is done to provide representation for a particular interest group at the board level, legally the nominee directors are required to act in the best interests of the company. As Jacobs J indicated above, this involves balancing the expectations of the person or entity that has appointed them with their legal obligation to act in the best interests of the company on whose board they sit. In the absence of agreement to the contrary, as existed in Levin's case, if an actual conflict of interest occurs, the nominee must comply with their duty to the company or resign from the company’s board.52 Under s 187, directors appointed to the board of a wholly owned subsidiary may take the interests of the holding company into consideration if: the constitution allows the director to do so; the director acts in good faith in the best interests of the holding company; and the subsidiary is not insolvent at the time the director acts and does not become insolvent because of the director's act. Alternate director An alternate director who is appointed to act in the place of another director can participate in one or more board meetings. The replaceable rule in s 201K allows for a director, with the other directors’ approval, to appoint an alternate director who can use all or any of the directors’ powers.

## 7.20.10 The role of the board

As indicated, the role of the board differs significantly between large and small companies. In large public companies, the board must delegate its power to manage the company to senior managers, and the directors then monitor the work of these managers. Monitoring management is at the heart of the role of the corporate board. In AWA v Daniels, Rogers J noted the significant powers that senior management has in a large corporation in the context of discussing the directors’ duty to act with care and diligence (discussed further in Chapter 11 at Section 11.10.10): ‘The board of a large public corporation cannot manage the corporation’s day to day business. That function must by business necessity be left to the corporation's executives. If the director of a large public corporation were to be immersed in the details of day to day operations the director would be incapable of taking more abstract, important decisions at board level ... In the context of the present case directors rely on management to: (a) carry out the day to day control of the corporation's business affairs

(b) establish proper internal controls, management information systems and accounting records (c) reduce to writing if appropriate and communicate policies and strategies adopted by the board (d) implement the policies and strategies adopted by the board (e) have a knowledge of and review detailed figures, contracts and other information about the corporation's affairs and financial position and summarise such information for the board where appropriate tion allows the director to do so; the director acts in good faith in the best interests of the holding

## 7.20.10 The role of the board

(e) have a knowledge of and review detailed figures, contracts and other information about the corporation’ affairs and financial position and summarise such information for the board where appropriate (£) prepare proposals and submissions for consideration by the board (g) prepare a budget (h) attend to personnel matters including hiring and firing of staff and their terms of employment! In addition to monitoring the activities of senior management, the board in a large company will be responsible for setting and overseeing the implementation of the company’s strategic goals and business plan; appointing the CEO and chairperson; approving the financial statements, major capital expenditures and annual budget; overseeing the accounting and reporting systems; and ensuring the company has in place an appropriate risk management strategy.22 In a small company, the board will have a more extensive role in managing the company. For example, the same people may run the business on a day-today basis, be directors of the company, and also be shareholders. Despite the lack of separation between those managing a company and its shareholders, in law, the division between the decision-making powers of these groups is maintained. O Loading. Please wait

The specific powers granted to members do not include the power to make management decisions unless this is granted under the constitution. Members who disagree with this allocation of power can alter the constitution to provide that key management matters need to be decided by the members in general meeting.*2 These provisions are not uncommon in small companies where the directors and members are the same or similar people. The question of the exact division of power between members and directors has been addressed by case law. The answer was provided in the 1906 case of Automatic Self-Cleansing Filter Syndicate Co Ltd v Cuninghame:* if the board is granted the power to manage the company, the general meeting has no power to intervene in or influence the exercise of that power unless the members vote to change the constitution. In this case, a small group of shareholders owned enough votes in the company to pass an ordinary resolution. They proposed a resolution at a members’ meeting directing the board to sell some of the company’s assets. Under the company’s Articles of Association, the board had the power to manage the company, except for a provision stating that the board's powers were subject to any resolution passed by special resolution at the general meeting. Another provision in the constitution expressly authorised the board to sell the company’s property on such terms as the board thought fit. The general meeting passed the resolution; however, the board refused to act onit. The English Court of Appeal held that, under the constitution, the board was the only organ within the company authorised to sell the company’s assets. This meant that the board did not need to act on the members’ direction. Cozens-Hardy LJ stated: [T]he shareholders have by their express contract mutually stipulated that their common affairs should be managed by certain directors to be appointed by the shareholders in the manner described by [the constitution] ... If you once get a stipulation of that kind in a contract made between the parties, what right is there to interfere with the contract, apart, of course, from any misconduct on the part of the directors? This approach was adopted in John Shaw & Sons (Salford) Ltd v Shaw, where Greer LJ stated the position in even stricter terms: If powers of management are vested in the directors, they and they alone can exercise those powers. The only way in which the general body of shareholders can control the exercise of the powers vested by [the constitution] in the directors is by altering the articles, or if the opportunity arises under [the constitution], by refusing to re-elect the directors of whose actions they disapprove. They cannot themselves usurp the powers which by the articles are vested in the directors any more than the directors can usurp the powers vested by [the constitution] in the general body of shareholders.22 In Howard Smith Ltd v Ampol Petroleum Ltd,=8 the Privy Council noted that ‘directors, within their management powers, may take decisions against the wishes of the majority of shareholders, and indeed the majority of shareholders cannot control them in the exercise of these powers while they remain in office'=2 In Australia, this position was adopted in NRMA v Parker® In this case, members in NRMA tried to use their statutory powers under s 249D of the Corporations Act (discussed below) to requisition a special members’ meeting to consider a motion advising the directors how to act in relation to employment issues. The board instituted legal proceedings challenging the validity of the resolution. McLelland J held that it was not within the members’ powers to seek to express an opinion by resolution on how a power vested in the directors should be exercised. As a result, the board were not required to convene the special meeting. In the subsequent case of NRMA Ltd v Snodgrass,*" the New South Wales Court of Appeal distinguished the Parker decision. In the Snodgrass case, the resolution proposed an alteration to the constitution. The members requisitioned the board to convene a special members’ meeting to consider an alteration to the constitution to require newly appointed directors to publish full details of their election campaign funding. The proposed provision required any director who did not publish their details to be disqualified from acting as a director. At both first instance and on appeal the Court held that proposing such a resolution was a proper purpose for convening a meeting.2 The NRMA constitution provided that ‘subject to the law and other provisions of the constitution’ management of the company was vested in the directors. It was held that these particular words allowed the constitution to be amended to stipulate how a particular management issues would be addressed. These cases were considered in the decision of Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility v Commonwealth Bank of Australia. This case involved the management of the company was vested in the directors. It was held that these particular words allowed the constitution to be amended to stipulate how a particular management issues would be addressed. These cases were considered in the decision of Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility v Commonwealth Bank of Australia This case involved the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility (ACCR) proposing, on behalf of over 100 members, three resolutions for consideration at the Commonwealth Bank's (CBA) 2014 annual general meeting. The first proposed resolution expressed that CBA’s directors should report to the members on the amount of greenhouse gas emissions the company financed. The second proposed resolution expressed that such a report was not included in the directors’ annual report. The third proposed resolution was a special resolution to amend CBA's constitution to require that the directors’ annual report disclose the amount of greenhouse gas emissions the company financed. CBA provided its notice of the 2014 annual general meeting. Only the third proposed resolution was included in the notice. The company stated in its notice of meeting that it did not consider this resolution to be in the best interest of shareholders or the company and recommended that members vote against it. The resolution was not successful at the annual general meeting. In correspondence with the ACCR, CBA stated that it considered the first and second resolutions dealt with management matters and were not capable of being legally binding even if passed. The ACCR brought proceedings against CBA, seeking an injunction to compel CBA to put the first and second resolutions to the meeting and a declaration that the board had acted outside its powers in recommending members vote against the third resolution. ACCR argued the first and second resolutions were intended to be non-binding as they were expressions of opinion and not an interference with the board’s management power. The ACCR also criticised the decision in NRMA v Parker. At first instance, Davies J of the Federal Court found that, as the constitution of CBA included a provision stating that the business of the company was to be managed by or under the direction of the directors, the members could not usurp that power by trying to assert a supervisory function at general meetings. Her Honour did not accept ACCR's criticism of the decision in Parker and upheld the principle that members could not propose resolutions that expressed an opinion on management decisions, even non-binding advisory resolutions. The Full Federal Court (Allsop CJ, Foster and Gleeson JJ) rejected an appeal by ACCR where it had argued that:

* the members did not need to have a specific power to allow them to propose advisory resolutions or,
+ inthe alternative, that if such a power was required, it was either part of the inherent power of members to propose resolutions or was a power to be im-
plied in CBA’s constitution. In rejecting these arguments, their Honours confirmed that, unless the members are given a specific power in the constitution or under statute, they could not ‘control, usurp or exercise the powers of the directors‘ It noted that members do not have an inherent power to propose resolutions that are not otherwise within their power.®* As an example of a statutory power giving members the right to express an opinion, their Honours referred to s 250R which allows the members to vote on an advisory resolution regarding the adoption of the remuneration report. The Full Court also rejected ACCR’s argument that the members had a legitimate interest in the subject matter of the resolutions, and that this made the resolutions effective. Their Honours considered that this ‘misunderstands the nature of the company as an entity distinct from its shareholders and directors’ and that an ‘act of the company (of which a resolution of its members is an example) must necessarily be an act which the company has the capacity or power to undertake’® The Court rejected the submission that the resolutions had to be put to the meeting by the board as the general meeting lacked the power to pass the resolution as an act of the company.©2 While ACCR was not successful in this case, its actions are still considered important in encouraging Australian corporations to pay greater attention to investor concerns, particularly over environmental issues.°& @) Loading. Please wait Directors’and members’ meetings serve an important function in corporate law. Company meetings are either ordinary meetings or special (or extraordinary) meetings. Ordinary meetings are regular meetings held according to an annual meeting schedule; for example, the annual general meeting of members is an ordinary meeting held once a year. Special or extraordinary meetings are unscheduled meetings that are convened to consider urgent or new matters that cannot wait until the next ordinary meeting. Matters upon which a decision is required are framed as resolutions, which are then voted upon at the meeting. The procedures for holding meetings are set out in the constitution (if there is one) and/or in the Corporations Act. As will be seen in the discussion below, most of the provisions in the Corporations Act dealing with company meetings are replaceable rules that can be altered by a provision in the constitution. Ensuring that the correct procedures for meetings are followed provides verification that a valid decision has been made. The rules for meetings are detailed and technical but are necessary for the proper functioning of a company. The rules for directors’ and members’ meetings cover a number of standard matters. These include who can convene a meeting, who can propose a resolution, what the notice requirements are, what the quorum is, how the meeting must be conducted, and how the decisions of the meeting need to be recorded. The Corporations Act provides that, in a proprietary company, an actual meeting does not need to be held where there is a circulating resolution of the members. A circulating resolution is one signed by all eligible participants (ss 248A and 249A). These resolutions are a convenient way to make a decision ina small company. In 2022, important changes were made to the Corporations Act, allowing for technology to be used in arranging and holding company meetings.©2 These reforms were the result of temporary measures put in place to help companies deal with the challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic.° Section 249R now provides that a company can hold a meeting of its members physically and/or virtually. A key condition, however, is that holding a meeting using technology must be permitted in the company’s constitution. This means that companies need to amend their constitution via a special resolution passed at a general meeting before virtual meetings can be held.2 Under s 249S, members must be given a reasonable opportunity to participate in a virtual meeting, meaning the meetings must be held at a reasonable time and place, using reasonable technology to connect more than one physical venue, and allowing members to ask questions and make comments orally or in writing. Section 1322(3A) gives members the right to apply to court to have the meeting invalidated on the basis that they did not have a reasonable opportunity to participate in the meeting. The court will only make an order where it considers there has been a substantial injustice which cannot be remedied any other way. Companies can also circulate meeting materials by electronic means. This is provided for in a new div 2 pt 1.2AA of the Corporations Act that deals with sending documents using technology. Under ss 110C and 110D, companies can send the following documents using electronic means:

* adocument that relates to a meeting of the members
+ adocument that relates to a resolution to be considered by the members without a meeting, and
* areport mentioned in s 314, including a financial report, directors’ report and auditor's report.

Members retain the right to elect to receive documents in physical form (s 110E) and can also elect not to receive documents at all or to receive only some documents (ss 110E(4), (5)). Under s 248D, directors’ meetings can also be called and held using technology consented to by all the directors.
## 7.30.05 Members’ meetings Annual general meeting

A public company (other than a public company that has only one member) must hold an annual general meeting (AGM) once a year (s 250N). The meeting must be held within five months of the end of the company’s financial year. A proprietary company has the option to hold an AGM, unless it is required to do so by its constitution. Under s 248D, directors’ meetings can also be called and held using technology consented to by all the directors.
## 7.30.05 Members’ meetings
Annual general meeting The purpose of the AGM is to provide key financial and business information to the members. Section 250R(1) lists matters that can be part of a public company AGM, including consideration of the annual financial report, directors’ report and auditor's report of the company, election of the directors, appointment of the auditor, and voting on the directors’ remuneration. Convening an extraordinary members’ meeting Members holding at least 5 per cent of the votes that may be cast at a general meeting can convene an extraordinary meeting (s 249F). In smaller companies, there can be a provision in the constitution allowing members to convene a meeting. Under the replaceable rule in s 249C, a director can convene a meeting. In publicly listed companies, the power of directors to call a members’ meeting cannot be displaced by the constitution (s 249CA). Where a director calls a meeting, the company secretary will be responsible for organising the meeting and the company will be liable to pay the costs. Where members with 5 per cent of the votes convene a meeting, they are responsible for organising the meeting and paying the costs. This can be a significant hurdle for members in Convening an extraordinary members’ meeting Members holding at least 5 per cent of the votes that may be cast at a general meeting can convene an extraordinary meeting (s 249F). In smaller companies, there can be a provision in the constitution allowing members to convene a meeting. Under the replaceable rule in s 249C, a director can convene a meeting. In publicly listed companies, the power of directors to call a members’ meeting cannot be displaced by the constitution (s 249CA). Where a director calls a meeting, the company secretary will be responsible for organising the meeting and the company will be liable to pay the costs. Where members with 5 per cent of the votes convene a meeting, they are responsible for organising the meeting and paying the costs. This can be a significant hurdle for members in large companies. One way around the issue of cost is for members to requisition the directors to convene a meeting at the expense of the company. Under s 249D, members with at least 5 per cent of the votes may request the company to call a meeting. The requisition must be in writing and include details on any resolution to be proposed at the meeting (s 249D(2)). The directors are obliged to call the meeting and the company must pay the costs. Under s 249D(5), the directors must call the members’ meeting within 21 days of receiving the notice, and the meeting must be held within two months of the company receiving the request22 If the directors do not call the meeting within 21 days, then members who hold at least 50 per cent of the votes from those requesting the meeting may call the meeting themselves and the company must reimburse them for their reasonable costs (s 249E(4)). The court also has the power to call a members’ meeting if there is no other practical way to do so (s 249G). Proposing a resolution Members with at least 5 per cent of the votes in the company, or at least 100 members entitled to vote at the meeting, may request a proposed resolution be included in the agenda of an AGM or an extraordinary members’ meeting (s 249N). This power was used by the members in Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility v Commonwealth Bank of Australia,2 considered above. Members with at least 5 per cent of the votes, or at least 100 members entitled to vote at the meeting, may request that the company send information to all members prior to the meeting (s 249P). This information may be a statement about a proposed resolution or any other matter to be considered at the general meeting. Provided the statement is no more than 1000 words and is not defamatory, the company is required to distribute this statement to all members at the same time (or as soon as practicable thereafter) and in the same way as the notice of the meeting (s 249P(6)). If the statement is received in time to include it with the notice of the meeting, the company pays the cost. If the statement is not included in time to send it with the notice of the meeting, the shareholders are jointly and individually liable for the cost of distributing the statement; however, the members can decide in general meeting that the company pay the costs. Notice of a meeting Section 249L requires that the notice of a general meeting must include:

+ details on the place, date and time of the meeting if there is only one location for the meeting Proposing a resolution

Members with at least 5 per cent of the votes in the company, or at least 100 members entitled to vote at the meeting, may request a proposed resolution be included in the agenda of an AGM or an extraordinary members’ meeting (s 249N). This power was used by the members in Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility v Commonwealth Bank of Australia considered above. Notice of a meeting Section 249L requires that the notice of a general meeting must include: if there are two or more locations at which the members can attend the meeting: the date and time for the meeting at each location, and the main location for the meeting if virtual meeting technology is being used to hold the meeting: sufficient information to allow the members to participate in the meeting by means of the technology the general nature of the business to be conducted any special resolutions to be proposed, and where members are entitled to appoint a proxy, the details of that proxy. The meeting must be held at a time that is reasonable and this timing must be reasonable at the physical location of the meeting or the virtual meeting (s 2495(3)). In Howard v Mechtler;/4 Austin J held that convening a meeting at 6 p.m. on 30 December was not an unreasonable time to hold a meeting. Members who attend a physical meeting or by using virtual meeting technology are taken for all purposes to be ‘present’ at the meeting while so attending (s 249RA(3)). All companies, other than listed companies, must give their members and directors at least 21 days’ notice of a general meeting or a period as provided for in the constitution (s 249H(1)). A meeting may be called with shorter notice if: (1) the meeting is an AGM and all of the members entitled to vote at the meeting agree to the shorter notice before the meeting is held; or (2) the meeting is a general meeting and members with at least 95 per cent of the votes that may be cast at the meeting agree before notice is given (s 249H(2)). However, at least 21 days’ notice of a general meeting in a public company must be given where a resolution is proposed to remove a director under s 203D or to appoint another director in place of a director removed under that section, or to remove an auditor under s 329 (ss 249H(3)-(4)). With a listed company, s 249HA(1) requires at least 28 days’ notice of a general meeting, even if a shorter period is provided for in the constitution. Under s 249J, notice of a general meeting must be given individually to each director and to each member entitled to vote. If a company has an auditor, it is entitled to receive notice of a general meeting in the same way as members (s 249K). Quorum A quorum is the minimum number of people that must be in attendance for a valid meeting to be held. Under the replaceable rule in s 249T, the quorum for a general meeting of the members is two members, who must be present throughout the meeting. If a quorum is not present within 30 minutes of the start time specified for the meeting, the directors must adjourn the meeting to a later time (s 249T(3)). Under the replaceable rule in s 249W, only the unfinished business from the previous meeting can be dealt with at the subsequent meeting. The requirement that the quorum must be present throughout the meet- Quorum A quorum is the minimum number of people that must be in attendance for a valid meeting to be held. Under the replaceable rule in s 249T, the quorum for a general meeting of the members is two members, who must be present throughout the meeting. If a quorum is not present within 30 minutes of the start time specified for the meeting, the directors must adjourn the meeting to a later time (s 249T(3)). Under the replaceable rule in s 249W, only the unfinished business from the previous meeting can be dealt with at the subsequent meeting. The requirement that the quorum must be present throughout the meeting has a possible exception: in Ball v Pearsall,22 Young J held that if a member leaves a meeting with the purpose of removing the quorum, the meeting may nevertheless continue. Voting Not all shares carry the right to vote and it is important to consult the constitution to determine if there are limits or enhancements on the voting rights attached to shares. Under the replaceable rule in s 250E, and subject to any rights or restrictions attaching to the shares, each shareholder with a share capital has one vote on a show of hands (s 250E(1)(a)), and one vote per share if there is a poll (s 250E(1)(b)).2* Decisions in the general meeting are passed by majority vote, unless a special resolution is required, when there must be the approval of three-quarters of the members who are present at the meeting or who vote by proxy In a company without share capital, each member has one vote per resolution, irrespective of whether the vote is taken on a show of hands or a poll (s 250E(2)). In all companies, unless otherwise provided for in the constitution, the chairperson of the general meeting has a casting vote in addition to any votes they may have as a member of the company (s 250E(3)). Under the replaceable rule in s 250J, a vote in the general meeting will be decided on a show of hands, unless a poll is demanded. Proxy votes can be counted for a decision ona show of hands. A poll is a vote entitling each shareholder to one vote per share, or such other arrangement as set out in the constitution. However, under s 250H, any shareholder with the right to cast two or more votes may refrain from casting all their votes or may cast their votes in different ways. This power to split votes can be useful when a nominee holds votes on behalf of more than one principal and wants to vote differently in their interests. Section 250G provides that any challenge to a person’s right to vote must be made at the meeting and determined by the chairperson, whose decision is final. Under s 250JA(1), a listed company must conduct a poll if:

* the notice of meeting sets out an intention to propose a resolution
* the company has given notice of a members’ resolution under s 249Q, or
* apoll is demanded.
This requirement cannot be overridden by a company’s constitution (s 250JA(2)).28 Companies can choose to use electronic devices for poll voting at face-to-face meetings. To enable such voting, shareholders are handed a mobile device containing details of their shareholding when they register at the meeting. If a poll is requested, the shareholder presses the relevant voting button. The chairperson then accesses the results on a screen visible to the members. The two benefits of this form of voting are that it is quicker to determine the results of a poll and there is an electronic audit trail of all the votes cast at the meeting. Technology has developed so that mobile devices can now deal with split votes (where one proportion of a shareholding is voting in favour of a resolution and another proportion is voting against) which are common with nominee holdings. Under s 253UB, a right is now granted to members with at least five per cent of the votes that may be cast at a meeting to request an independent person to

* apoll is demanded.
This requirement cannot be overridden by a company’s constitution (s 250JA(2)).22 Under s 253UB, a right is now granted to members with at least five per cent of the votes that may be cast at a meeting to request an independent person to observe and prepare a report on a poll. The request must be in writing and made at least five days before the meeting date22 Under the replaceable rule in s 250K, a poll may be taken on any resolution and a demand for a poll may be withdrawn. Under s 250L, a poll needs to be supported by at least five members entitled to vote on the resolution, by members with at least five per cent of the votes that may be cast on the resolution, or by the chairperson, unless the constitution provides for a lower number. Proxy votes can be used to support a poll (s 249Y(1)). Proxy voting Section 249X is a replaceable rule for proprietary companies and a mandatory rule for public companies. It provides that any member of a company entitled to vote at the general meeting may appoint a proxy to attend the meeting and vote on their behalf (s 249X(1)). A proxy may be an individual or a body corporate (s 249X(1A)). Where a body corporate is appointed as a proxy, it may then appoint an individual to act as its representative (s 250D(1)(d)). The appointment may state the percentage or total number of votes available to the proxy to vote at the meeting (s 249X(2)). A member who is entitled to cast two or more votes at a meeting may appoint up to two proxies to attend and vote at the meeting (s 249X(3)). Where the appointment of two proxies does not specify the percentage or number of votes to be cast by the proxy, the proxy may exercise half of the member's votes. A proxy has the same rights as the member to speak at the meeting, to vote (subject to any limitations in their appointment), and to demand a poll (s 249Y(1)). The member appointing the proxy need not specify how they want the proxy to vote. Even if they do specify how the proxy should vote, unless the proxy is the chairperson of the meeting (discussed below), there is no obligation upon the proxy to vote, either on a show of hands or on a poll. However, if they do vote, they must do so in accordance with the member's instructions (s 250BB). The notice of a meeting where members are entitled to appoint a proxy (which is compulsory in a public company) must include a statement indicating: that the member has the right to appoint a proxy; whether the proxy has to be a member of the company; and, where the member can cast two or more votes, that they can appoint two proxies and indicate what portion of votes each proxy can exercise (s 249L(1)). In a listed company, details must be provided of an address and fax number for sending in the proxy and may include an electronic address or other electronic means by which the company will receive notice of a proxy (s 250BA). Unless the constitution provides otherwise, for a proxy to be valid it must be signed by the member making the appointment,2 and include details on the member's name and address, the company’s name, the proxy’s name or the name of the office held by the proxy, and the meeting at which the appointment is to be used (s 250A). To be valid, the form appointing a proxy must be received by the company no less than 48 hours before the meeting, unless the constitution specifies a shorter period (s 250B).2! The proxy notification is taken to have been received by the company when the letter, fax or email (if allowed) arrives at the company’s registered office. It is common for proxy forms to allow the member to appoint the chairperson of the meeting as their proxy. In such cases, according to s 250BB, the chairperson is obligated to cast the votes for any proxies they possess during a poll. This rule was introduced into the Corporations Act in 2011 in response to concerns that chairpersons could ‘cherrypick’ which proxies they would vote, according to which resolutions were in the best interests of the board.£2 Section 250BC creates a more difficult situation where proxies can be transferred to the chairperson if a member appoints a proxy and specifies how the proxy is to vote, but the proxy does not vote on a poll as directed. In these circumstances, provided the company has notice of the directed proxies, then if the proxies are not voted they fall to the chairperson to vote. Under the replaceable rule in s 250J(1A), the number and instructions contained in any proxies must be disclosed by the chairperson before a vote is taken. As noted by Wooton J in Re Marra Developments Ltd 23 this makes these proxies ‘far more important in determining the outcome of the dispute ... than anything that happens at the meeting’ For a listed company, the details of any proxies are disclosed in the minutes of the meeting. Validation of incorrect procedure Under s 1322(2), a procedural irregularity does not cause a meeting or resolution to be invalid unless a court is of the opinion that the irregularity has caused or may cause substantial injustice that cannot be remedied by a court order. Section 1322(1)(b) provides that a procedural irregularity includes a failure to have the required quorum at a members, directors’ or creditors’ meeting, or a defect, irregularity or deficiency of notice or time. If the court is of the opinion that such an irregularity has or may cause substantial injustice, then the court will declare the proceeding to be invalid (s 1322(2)). Section 1322(3) provides that a meeting, notice of a meeting, or any proceeding at a meeting is not invalidated just because of an accidental omission to give notice or the failure of a person to receive notice. However, a court may declare a meeting void in such cases upon the application of the person who failed to receive notice, any person entitled to vote at the meeting, or ASIC (s 1322(3)). Section 1322(3A) provides that, even where a member has not had a reasonable opportunity to participate in a meeting, the meeting will only be invalid if the court is of the opinion that substantial injustice has been caused or may be caused, and the injustice cannot be remedied by a court order (s 1322(3A)(a)). Where the court is of that opinion, it will declare the meeting void or a part of the meeting or a proceeding at the meeting void (s 1322(3A)(b)). The purpose of s 1322 was discussed in Beck v Weinstock and French CJ has additionally noted that: Corporations, in contemporary Australian society, serve the purposes of enterprises, large and small, owned and operated by men and women, some of whom are sophisticated, knowledgeable and well advised on matters of corporate governance and some, perhaps many, of whom are not. Section 1322(4) and related provisions reflect a long-standing legislative recognition that mistakes will happen in corporate governance and that it is not in the public interest that the validity of decisions made in relation to corporations be unduly vulnerable to innocent errors which may be corrected without substantial injustice to third parties. In accordance with its evident purpose, s 1322(4)(a) is to be construed broadly and applied pragmatically, principally by reference to considerations of substance Validation of incorrect procedure Section 1322(4) covers the orders that a court may give, and s 1322(6) requires a court to be satisfied of certain matters before it grants an order.

## 7.30.10 Directors’ meetings

It is usual for the rules on the conduct of directors’ meetings to be contained in the constitution. These rules are often more flexible than the rules for members’ meetings and may provide that:

* directors can regulate their meetings as they think fit
* any director may convene a meeting, and + decisions at a meeting are to be made on a majority vote.

Sections 248A-G of the Corporations Act deal with the conduct of directors’ meetings, although most of these provisions are replaceable rules. For example, s 248A provides that the directors can pass a resolution without a meeting if all the directors entitled to vote sign a document containing a statement that they are in favour of the resolution, and the document also contains the resolution. Such a provision, requiring the written consent of all the directors to pass a resolution, is commonly included in the constitution of smaller companies. Large companies may allow a resolution to be passed outside of a meeting with a majority of directors voting in support of it 2° Directors’ meetings may be called or held using any technology consented to by all the directors and a consent may be a standing one (s 248D). It is common for ordinary directors’ meetings to be held on a regular basis; for example, on the same day and at the same time each month. A standing notice can be issued for such meetings or notice of the next meeting may be included in the company minutes of the previous meeting. Under the replaceable rule in s 248F, the quorum for a directors’ meeting is two directors. In larger companies, this number is often higher. It is usual for each director to have one vote, with the chairperson holding a casting vote (s 248G). OF May Cause SUDSLANUd! INUSUCE Lidl Cannot be remedied Vy d COUFL OFUeF, SECUUT! 13.22(1)\D) PIOVIUES Ula d proceaurdl Ireguidrity INCIUGeS @ allure LO have the required quorum at a members, directors’ or creditors’ meeting, or a defect, irregularity or deficiency of notice or time. If the court is of the opinion that such an irregularity has or may cause substantial injustice, then the court will declare the proceeding to be invalid (s 1322(2)).

## 7.30.10 Directors’ meetings O Loading. Please wait

Section 198E provides that a single director may exercise all the powers of the company except any that the constitution requires to be exercised in general meeting. Under s 201E, a director in a single director/single shareholder proprietary company can appoint an additional director by recording that appointment and signing the record. Similarly, under s 249D, resolutions can be passed by a single member making a record of the resolution and signing that record. The resolution must also be recorded in the company’s minute book (s 251A(1)(e)). @) Loading. Please wait Over the last few decades, there has been increasing focus in corporate regulation on companies disclosing key information for the benefit of members, creditors, employees, consumers and the public. Most of these disclosure obligations have focused on improving the financial information disclosed by companies. For example, the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program (Audit Reform and Corporate Disclosure) Act 2004 (Cth) increased the roles and responsibilities of auditors; the amount of information that must be disclosed by listed companies; the responsibilities of the CEO and CFO of listed companies in relation to financial statements; and the way in which accounting and auditing standards are set and Operate. More recently, the focus has shifted to companies disclosing information in relation to environmental, social and governance issues (ESG). While there has been longstanding debate on whether large companies should voluntarily disclose such information, steps are now being taken in Australia and around the world to make such reporting mandatory. As noted by Treasury: ‘The Government has legislated Australia’s commitment to reduce emissions by 43% by 2030 and achieve net zero emissions by 2050. Financial markets will be critical in financing the substantial investment required to meet these targets. To appropriately price climate-related risks and opportunities, value assets and allocate capital efficiently, investors need information on. climate risks and opportunities and the actions being taken by individual companies to meet their climate change targets. Climaterelated financial disclosures are an important mechanism through which companies can communicate this information to investors. Effective disclosures will ensure the financial effects of climate change are routinely considered in business and investment decisions.82 In September 2024, the government passed the Treasury Laws Amendment (Financial Market Infrastructure and Other Measures) Act 2024 (Cth). This legislation sets out a three-phased approach where the requirements first apply to a relatively limited group of very large companies and financial institutions and then expand to apply progressively to smaller entities over a three-year period. The information that companies must disclose includes:

* governance processes, controls and procedures used to monitor and manage climate-related financial risks and opportunities
* material climate-related risks and opportunities to their business, and how the entity identifies, assesses, and manages risk and opportunities
+ where risks and opportunities are concentrated in the entity's supply chain, the anticipated time horizon and metrics that help investors understand the
scale and impact of risks and opportunities. The climate-related financial disclosures are to be incorporated into a new annual sustainability report, which is added to the existing obligations to prepare annual financial reports under ch 2M of the Corporations Act38 In general, the amendments aim to replicate existing reporting obligations for annual financial reporting, including who must prepare annual financial reports, recordkeeping, presentation of reports at AGMs, provision of financial reports to members and the public, role of the regulator, legal liability and audit and assurance These reforms aim to enhance transparency and enable shareholders and investors to have consistent and comparable information regarding how companies are managing climate-related risks and opportunities. They align with global trends towards standardised sustainability reporting and supporting the transition to a net-zero economy and are aimed at ‘not only prompting companies to recognise their impact on people and the planet but also provide a means to proactively address them by blending finance and the broader impact of the business‘22 As these reforms recognise, parties other than shareholders benefit from increased corporate disclosure including employees, investors and consumers. A disadvantage includes greater costs of compliance for companies and potential information overload for shareholders.2- As discussed in Chapter 17, companies listed on the Australian Securities Exchange are subject to additional disclosure regulation, including requirements for periodic disclosure (annual, half-yearly or quarterly reporting, usually via audited accounts); continuous disclosure (a continuing obligation to report events as they occur); and special occasion disclosure (the obligation to disclose information during special events such as takeovers and fundraising by initial public offers). The discussion in the remainder of this chapter does not cover the continuous disclosure requirements for listed companies as these are discussed in at its registered office, its principal place of business, or at another place approved by ASIC (s 251A(5)). It must also ensure that the minute books for members’ meetings and resolutions are open for inspection by members free of charge (s 251B). The importance of ensuring that accurate minutes are kept in accordance with s 251A was highlighted in the High Court decision of Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Hellicar22 This case is discussed in Chapter 11 (at Section 11.15.05) in the context of directors’ duty of care and diligence. A key issue in the case was whether the directors of James Hardie, at board meetings in February 2001, had discussed and approved a media release stating that a foundation, which had been set up to compensate asbestos victims, was fully funded. The minutes of the February meetings recorded that the directors had tabled and approved the media release; however, the minutes were not prepared within one month as required under s 251A(1). The non-executive directors of the board argued that the February minutes were false, even though the minutes for February were subsequently adopted at the April board meeting. In a combined judgment, French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ held that insufficient weight had been given to these board minutes in the lower court decisions.2 They considered that, even though the evidentiary presumption contained in s 251A(6) did not apply on the facts, the board minutes were still relevant as business records of the company. As such, the February minutes were evidence that a draft ASX announcement had been tabled and approved at that meeting. The April board minutes were evidence that the board had approved the minutes of the February meeting as an accurate record. According to the High Court, the minutes were a relatively contemporaneous record of events. Heydon J, in a separate judgment, noted that, although there were some errors in the minutes, these were small and qualitatively different from the mistake that would have been made if the minutes had included a resolution that was never passed.2> Asa result of this decision, companies are now encouraged to pay greater attention to their record-keeping and to ensure their minutes are accurate. This is particularly important as the High Court noted the criminal sanctions that can apply to non-compliance with s 251A and emphasised the significant eviden- tiary value accorded to the minutes.2& Financial records All companies are required to keep key financial records. ‘Financial records’ are defined in s 9 to include invoices, receipts, payment orders, documents of prime entry, and working papers. Under s 286, a company must have records that correctly record and explain its transactions and financial position and performance, and enable true and fair financial statements to be prepared and audited. A company that does not keep or retain financial records as required under s 286 is presumed to be insolvent during that period (s 588E(4)), and directors may be liable for contravention of s 344(1), which is a civil penalty provision. Members have limited access to the company’s books and financial records. Under s 247D (a replaceable rule), the directors may authorise a member to inspect the company’s books. Members may be authorised to have access by a resolution passed at the general meeting. Finally, a member may apply for a court order under s 247A to inspect the financial records. The court will only grant such an order if it is satisfied the member is acting in good faith and the inspection is for a proper purpose. Financial reports Preparing accurate financial reports is a key responsibility of those running a company. The Corporations Act contains requirements aimed at making companies disclose relevant information about their business and financial position. For example, s 341(1) requires companies, other than small proprietary companies, to report to members via an annual financial report, an annual directors’ report, and an auditor's report on the financial report. Company registers Companies are required to maintain registers, a task that is often outsourced in large public companies. These include a register of members (s 169), optionholders (s 170), and debenture-holders (s 171). Only companies that have issued options or debentures are required to maintain these registers, while every company must maintain a register of members. The register of members must include the member's name and address, the number and class of shares held, and whether those shares are partly or fully paid up (s 169). The register must also contain the name and address of any member who has sold or transferred their shares in the previous seven years (s 169(7)). Under s 170, the register of debenture-holders must include details of the debenture-holder’s name and address, and the number of debentures held. This information is required for the option-holders’ register, plus additional information including when an option can be exercised and any consideration for the grant of the options (s 170). Under s 172, the registers must be kept at the company’s registered office, its principal place of business, a place in Australia where the work involved in maintaining the registers is done, or another place in Australia approved by ASIC. Section 174 nravides that. in the ahsence of evidence to the contrarv. these reaisters are nroof of the matters shown within them, financial records as required under s 286 is presumed to be insolvent during that period (s 588E(4)), and directors may be liable for contravention of s 344(1), which is a civil penalty provision. Company registers Any person is allowed to inspect the register kept by a company (s 173(1)). Any person whose name appears on a register can inspect that register free of charge. Under s 173(3), the company may charge other people to inspect the register for a fee up to the prescribed amount, and must provide a copy of the register, or part thereof, within seven days of such a request and the payment of any fee required by the company. In AXA Asia Pacific Holdings Ltd v Direct Share Purchasing Corporation Pty Ltd,22 the Federal Court was asked to review the fee that Direct Share Purchasing Corporation was charged by AXA for a copy of its members’ share register. AXA had charged Direct Share $17,195.39 for providing it with a CD-ROM containing a PDF copy of the members’ register. The Corporations Regulations 2001 (Cth) reg 1.1.01 and sch 4 item 3(b) provide that the fee for a copy of a register kept on a computer is to be a‘reasonable amount that does not exceed the marginal cost to the company of providing a copy’ The Court held that a reasonable fee was $250 and ordered AXA to refund the difference. Sections 177(1) and (1A) provide that information in the register cannot be used to contact or send material to members unless that information is relevant to their shareholding or the company agrees to the information being sent. Under s 173(3A), a person applying for a copy of the register must specify the purposes for which it will be used. Auditor’s report As discussed below, some companies are required to prepare an auditor's report. If such a report is required, the auditor is under a statutory duty to report to the members whether, in their opinion, the annual financial report is in accordance with the Corporations Act, complies with the relevant accounting standards, and provides a true and fair view (s 308(1)). The nature and content of an auditor's report is discussed further at Section 7.45.10.

## 7.40.10 Information provided to ASIC
Registered office Acompany must advise ASIC of the address of its registered office (s 121). This address cannot be a post office box, and the company must notify ASIC of any changes. A registered office is important to the functioning of a company as it provides a location where registers and records of the company are kept, and where notices and other communications can be sent. For example, s 109X provides that a document may be served on a company by leaving it at, or posttion can be exercised and any consideration for the grant of the options (s 170). Under s 172, the registers must be kept at the company’s registered office, its principal place of business, a place in Australia where the work involved in maintaining the registers is done, or another place in Australia approved by ASIC. Section 176 provides that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, these registers are proof of the matters shown within them. Auditor’s report It is common for small companies to use the address of their lawyer or accountant as the company’s registered address. The registered office of a public company must be open to the public for at least three hours each business day, between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. Extract of particulars Prior to 2003, all companies were required to lodge an annual return with ASIC. Currently, each company is sent an extract of particulars once a year and must notify ASIC if there are any changes or if there is any incorrect information (s 346C). This process is much simpler than the previous requirement of an annual return. The extract is sent to companies on their review date, which is either the anniversary of the company’s registration if the company was registered after 2001, the date of the company’s incorporation or registration as recorded on the ASIC register, or such other date as determined by ASIC and notified to the company (s 346A). Under s 347A, the directors are required to pass a solvency resolution within two months of the company’s review date. The company must notify ASIC if the directors pass a negative solvency resolution or if they do not pass a solvency resolution within two months of the review date (s 347B). C) Loading. Please wait As indicated above, the Corporations Act contains requirements aimed at making companies disclose relevant information about the business and financial position of the company. This information is increasingly important to members, creditors, investors, employees and the public.
## 7.45.05 Financial records

Under s 286(1), a company must keep written financial records that correctly record and explain its transactions and financial position and performance and enable true and fair financial statements to be prepared and audited. The minimum books of account required under this section are a general ledger and general journal. ASIC's advice to the owners of small proprietary companies is that, in addition to the above requirements, they also keep financial statements, computer backup disks, cash records, bank account statements, a sales journal and debtors’ ledger, work in progress records, invoices and statements received and paid, a creditors’ ledger, unpaid invoices, and tax returns.28 Under s 288, if financial records are kept in electronic form, they must be convertible into hard copy, which must be made available within a reasonable time to any person entitled to inspect the records. Financial records must be retained by a company for at least seven years after the transaction covered in the records (s 286(2)). Directors must have reasonable access to the financial records of the company at all times (s 290(1)). However, a director may be refused access if it is shown that they intend to misuse the information or that inspection could materially harm the company.22

## 7.45.10 Financial reports

Chapter 2M of the Corporations Act contains rules on the preparation and disclosure of financial information and the auditing of the financial accounts.1® Not all companies are required to prepare audited annual financial accounts, with public and listed companies subject to the greatest disclosure requirements. Generally, small proprietary companies do not need to prepare annual financial statements, have their accounts audited, or lodge their financial statements with ASIC. A proprietary company is classified as a small company if it satisfies any two or more of the following criteria:

* the consolidated revenue for the financial year of the company and any entities it controls is $50 million or less
+ the value of the consolidated gross assets at the end of the financial year of the company and any entities it controls is $25 million or less
* the company and any entities it controls has 100 or fewer employees at the end of the financial year (ss 45A(2), 45A(3), reg 1.0.02B). Annual financial report

Section 292(1) requires public companies and large proprietary companies to prepare a financial report and a directors’ report every year. A small proprietary company can be requested to prepare a financial report by shareholders holding at least five per cent of the votes in the company (ss 292(2), 293(1)). If such a request is made, it can provide that only some (including none) of the accounting standards must be complied with, a directors’ report or part of such a report need not be prepared, and the financial report must be audited (s 293(3)). A small proprietary company can also be directed by ASIC to prepare a financial report or it may specify the particular requirements that the company is to comply with (ss 292(2), 294(1)). The Corporations Act does not specify a timeline for the preparation of a financial report. The deadline for a public company to send its financial report to members is either 21 days before the annual general meeting or four months after the end of the financial year. A proprietary company must send the reports to members within four months from the end of the financial year (s 315) and the financial report must be lodged with ASIC within four months from the end of the financial year (s 319(3)). The requirements for an annual financial report are set out in s 295. They include the financial statements for the year, notes to the financial statements, and the directors’ declaration about the statements and notes. Under s 295(2), the financial statements for the year are those required by the accounting standards, being the standards made by the Australian Accounting Standards Board. Under the accounting standards, the basic components of the financial statements are the balance sheet, the profit and loss statement, and the cash flow statement. Where a parent company controls other entities, the parent company is required to prepare consolidated financial statements. Directors’ declaration on the financial reports Adirectors’ declaration needs to be included in the financial reports. This is a statement made in accordance with a board resolution, which states whether: Directors must have reasonable access to the financial records of the company at all times (s 290(1)). However, a director may be refused access if it is shown that they intend to misuse the information or that inspection could materially harm the company.22

## 7.45.10 Financial reports

* the consolidated revenue for the financial year of the company and any entities it controls is $50 million or less
+ the value of the consolidated gross assets at the end of the financial year of the company and any entities it controls is $25 million or less
* the company and any entities it controls has 100 or fewer employees at the end of the financial year (ss 45A(2), 45A(3), reg 1.0.02B). Annual financial report Directors’ declaration on the financial reports
ain tha diractarel aninian thara ven raaeanahla aeaunde ta halinun that tha camnaniuill ha ahla ta nau ite dahte ve and ushan thou hacama dua and nauahle Annual financial report Directors’ declaration on the financial reports in the directors’ opinion, there are reasonable grounds to believe that the company will be able to pay its debts as and when they become due and payable in the directors’ opinion, the financial statements and notes are in accordance with the Corporations Act, including compliance with the accounting standards, and provide a true and fair view of the company if the company has adopted international financial reporting standards, that the notes to the financial statements contain an explicit and unreserved statement of compliance with those reporting standards if the company is listed, that the directors have been given the declarations required by s 295A. This requires the CEO and CFO of a listed company to provide a declaration stating whether the financial records have been properly maintained in accordance with s 286, the financial statements and notes comply with the accounting standards, and the financial statements and notes give a true and fair view of the company. The declaration must be dated. Although the declaration is made by all the directors, via a joint resolution, it will usually be signed by one director on behalf of all the other directors. Directors’ report A directors’ report must be prepared each financial year by all public companies and all large proprietary companies (s 292). The directors’ report must be adopted by a resolution of directors and dated and signed by the directors. The directors’ report must include:

* general information required by ss 299 and 299A for listed companies
* specific information required by ss 300 and 300A for listed companies * a copy of the auditor's independence declaration under s 307C.

Section 299(1) provides that the directors’ report must include: a review of the company’s operations; details of significant changes in the company’s affairs; a statement of the company’s principal activities and any significant changes in the activities; a reference to likely developments in the company’s future operations and expected results of those operations; and, if the company’s operations are subject to any particular and significant environmental regulation, details of the company’s performance in relation to those regulations. For a listed company, the directors’ report must also contain an operating and financial review to enable shareholders to make an informed assessment of its operations, financial position, business strategies and future prospects (s 299A). Directors’ report Under s 300(1), the directors’ report must set out a range of specific information including: details of dividends or distributions to members; the directors’ and officers’ names, and the names of the partners, directors and/or other officers of the corporation’s auditor; options over an issue of shares; and indemnities given or insurance premiums paid to officers or auditors. Public companies must include additional information on the directors’ qualifications, experience and special responsibilities, the directors’ attendance at board meetings, and the directors’ attendance at committee meetings (s 300(10)). Listed companies must also include information on the directors’ relevant interests in shares, the directors’ contract or options over shares, and the directors’ contracts to call shares (s 300(11)). Auditor’s report An auditor is a person or organisation employed to carry out an audit and present a reliable and independent report to the company on the accounts and financial position of the company. As noted in the Explanatory Memorandum to the 2004 amendments to the Corporations Act: Audited financial statements are an important part of the financial information that is available to the capital markets and an essential element of effective corporate governance ... This sound operation of Australia’s financial markets is dependent upon parties such as auditors providing information or services to investors free from any bias, undue influence or conflict of interest2% The requirement for auditor independence is found in s 324CA, which provides that an individual or audit company is not independent if they conduct an audit when there is a conflict of interest in relation to the company being audited and the individual or audit company does not, as soon as possible once becoming aware of the conflict, take all reasonable steps to ensure that the conflict of interest situation ceases to exist. Section 324CD defines ‘conflict of interest situations: Individual auditors must lodge an independence declaration with the directors, and this declaration must be included in the annual directors’ report (ss 307(3), 298(1)(c)). The declaration must state that, to the best of the auditor’s knowledge or belief, there has been no contravention of the auditor independence requirements in any applicable codes of professional conduct in preparing their report (s 307C(5B)). Not all companies need to appoint an auditor. A public company must appoint an auditor within one month of the company being registered, unless the members have appointed an auditor at a general meeting (s 327A(1)). However, a proprietary company may choose to appoint an auditor (s 325). Small proprietary companies are not required to appoint an auditor unless ASIC or members holding at least five per cent of the votes in the company direct it to prepare an audited financial report (ss 293(3)(c), 294). To enable an auditor to prepare a report, s 310(a) provides that they have a right of access at all reasonable times to the company’s books. An auditor must ations and expected results of those operations; and, if the company’s operations are subject to any particular and significant environmental regulation, details of the company’s performance in relation to those regulations. For a listed company, the directors’ report must also contain an operating and financial review to enable shareholders to make an informed assessment of its operations, financial position, business strategies and future prospects (s 299A). Auditor’s report information or services to investors free from any bias, undue influence or conflict of interest The requirement for auditor independence is found in s 324CA, which provides that an individual or audit company is not independent if they conduct an audit when there is a conflict of interest in relation to the company being audited and the individual or audit company does not, as soon as possible once becoming aware of the conflict, take all reasonable steps to ensure that the conflict of interest situation ceases to exist. Section 324CD defines ‘conflict of interest situations: Individual auditors must lodge an independence declaration with the directors, and this declaration must be included in the annual directors’ report (ss 307(3), 298(1)(c)). The declaration must state that, to the best of the auditor’s knowledge or belief, there has been no contravention of the auditor independence requirements in any applicable codes of professional conduct in preparing their report (s 307C(5B)). To enable an auditor to prepare a report, s 310(a) provides that they have a right of access at all reasonable times to the company’s books. An auditor must carry out an audit of the company’s annual financial report, and, if appropriate, its half-yearly financial report (ss 308, 309). The auditor must provide a report to members stating whether, in the auditor's opinion, the financial reports are in accordance with the Corporations Act, in compliance with accounting standards, and are a true and fair view of the company (ss 308(1), 309(1)). If the report does not comply with the accounting standards, the auditor's report must quantify the effect of non-compliance (to the extent that it is practicable to do so) and provide a description of any defects or irregularities (ss 308(2), 308(3) (a), 309(2), 309(3)(a)). In addition, the auditor must state whether they were given all information, explanation and assistance necessary for the conduct of the audit, whether sufficient financial records have been kept, and whether other required records and registers have been kept (ss 308(3)(b), 309(3)(b)). Finally, if the financial statements include any additional information, the auditor's report must state whether that additional information was necessary to give a true and fair view, and if the directors’ report includes a remuneration report the auditor must provide their opinion on whether that remuneration report complies with s 300A. O Loading. Please wait Failure to comply with the requirements for keeping financial records (s 286) is a strict liability offence, and directors who fail to take all reasonable steps to comply with pts 2M.2 (financial records) and 2M.3 (financial reporting) contravene s 344(1), which is a civil penalty provision. Civil penalties are discussed in Chapter 1. A director will have taken all reasonable steps to comply with the financial records provisions if they employ competent staff and have appropriate procedures in place that define what staff are required to do.1® Section 588E(4) provides that a company that fails to keep and retain financial records as required by s 286 is presumed to be insolvent for the purposes of the directors’ duty to prevent insolvent trading contained in s 588G and any transactions covered by ss 588- FA-G. This chapter discussed some of the ‘nuts and bolts’ issues of corporate law. Understanding which groups can make decisions as the company, and how meetings are held, is fundamental to the workings of a company and those involved. This chapter also considered the role of increased shareholder activism, and of reforms designed to increase corporate reporting on environmental issues. Understanding the rules and requirements on the provision of information to members and the public is important in the context of both good corporate governance and increased corporate accountability. They are also some of the most practical issues involved in the everyday running of companies.
