# Chapter 2

Corporate law theory and debates 2.05 Introduction: the importance of corporate theory 2.10 Concession theory 2.15 Aggregate theory 2.20 Economic theories 2.25 Team production theory 2.30 Natural entity theory 2.35 An organisational perspective 2.40 Feminist perspectives 2.45 Corporate purpose

## 2.45.05 Enlightened shareholder value

## 2.45.10 Stakeholder theory

## 2.45.15 Global developments 2.55 Summary

We began Chapter 1 by emphasising the need to be aware of the different contexts within which corporations and corporate law are created and operate. We considered the historical and regulatory contexts of contemporary Australian corporate law. This chapter considers the importance of the different theoretical and ideological perspectives that assist in understanding the nature of the corporation, the role and purpose of corporations in contemporary society, and the rationales for and against the regulation of corporate activity. Corporate lawyers talk frequently about ‘the corporation; or ‘the company’, but often do not pause to think about or explain the meaning of the term! For example, directors owe duties to ‘the corporation, but there are competing judicial opinions about who is to be included within this category. The corporation is often referred to as a legal entity which is capable of exercising its own legal rights. This includes the right to own property (for example, real estate, plant and machinery), to create property (for example, shares, debentures and other securities) and to initiate legal actions on its own behalf. On other occasions, the corporation is referred to as though it were an item of property—something that can be owned and controlled, bought and sold (for example, in a takeover bid). This dual role as both owner or creator of property and item of property is one of the distinguishing—and confusing—aspects of corporate law? Each of these uses of the term ‘the corporation’ relies on some concept of what the corporation is. The way in which lawyers, judges, regulators, politicians, economists and corporate insiders talk about corporations, corporate law, and corporate activity reflects a wide range of ideas and assumptions about the nature, role and purposes of the corporation and the degree to which, and the manner in which, corporate activity should or should not be regulated. These ideas are drawn from a variety of conceptual frameworks or theories that have had prominence at different times. However, all of these theories continue to exert some degree of influence on modern corporate law. The theories behind legislative changes or judicial decisions in the twenty-first century still have to contend with the theories or ideas that prompted legal developments over a century ago. One difficulty in discussing corporate theory is that theories are not always expressly acknowledged or explained; they tend to remain submerged beneath the text of the statute or judicial decisions. Nevertheless, lawyers, legislators and judges rely implicitly upon these different theories whenever they prefer one decision over another, argue for one interpretation of a section over another, resolve an ambiguity in legal principle one way rather than another, or urge one type of legal reform rather than another (or opt for no reform at all). In this chapter, we discuss a range of perspectives that fall under the umbrella term ‘corporate theory’ Taken together these theories address three questions: (1) What is the corporation, and from where does it gain its political and social legitimacy? (2) What is the purpose of the corporation, and whose interests should it serve? (3) How, if at all, should the exercise of power by—and within—corporations be regulated, and by whom? These are interrelated questions and some theories help to answer more than one of them. Each theory also says something about one or other of the four perennial issues introduced in Chapter 1: the tensions between group versus individual; management versus ownership; facilitation versus intervention; and public versus private2 Thinking about corporations and corporate law, whether it be through one of the approaches described in this chapter or some other perspective, means making a choice about the range of values represented in each of these distinctions. As one writer has emphasised: To subscribe to a particular theory of the corporation ... often reflects a particular political attitude about corporate activity and correspondingly implies that corporations should be treated in a certain way4 This chapter surveys the main examples of corporate theory. While each author of this book has their own theoretical preference, we try to put our views on hold and invite the reader to consider their own position> Stated simply, concession theory treats the corporation as an artificial entity created by the state: corporations exist ‘only because governments say so’2 From this perspective, the status of the company as a legal actor, distinct from its members or directors, is regarded as a concession (or privilege) granted by the state. There are different versions of this theory; we can call them the’strong’and ‘mild’ versions. Under the strong version, corporate status is regarded as a government-granted privilege that must be earned ona continuing basis. One expression of this approach is found in a judgment of Cooke J in the New Zealand Court of Appeal: [L]imited liability is a privilege. It is a privilege healthy as tending to the expansion of opportunities and commerce, but it is open to abuse. Irresponsible structural engineering—involving the creating, dissolving or transforming of incorporated companies to the prejudice of creditors—is a mischief to which the courts should be alive® The strong version posits that corporations, as creatures of the State, have only those rights granted them by the State’? Those rights include the legal capacity of corporations to enter into contracts, own property, issue shares, and commence and defend legal actions in their own right. Consequently, the government must regulate corporations to enable and then control the continued exercise of these rights. In the mild version, corporate status is presumed to apply once the basic legislative prerequisites for incorporation have been met; for example, minimum membership and directorship requirements. The House of Lords’ decision in Salomon v Salomon & Co Ltd!° (discussed in Chapter 3) provides an example of this aspect of concession theory. Lord Halsbury noted that the company is an ‘artificial creation of the legislature’ but stressed that once it was properly incorporated ‘the company has a real existence’! Under this version, there is a presumption in favour of government regulation,2 but it is not a mandate: governments may regulate corporate activity. Concession theory makes two claims about corporations in the strong and mild versions. The first claim concerns the metaphysical status of corporations: they are ‘artificial’ entities. The term ‘artificial’ does not mean the same thing as ‘fictitious’; this theory does not argue that corporations do not exist as organisational or operational entities. Rather, concession theory treats the corporation as a construction that is capable of bearing rights and duties separately from those individuals who populate it. As Gageler J (now Gageler CJ) has explained, ‘[t]o refer to an “artificial” legal person necessarily implies no more than the existence of a unit or entity, not being merely a natural person, in respect of which legal personality has been conferred or recognised’!3 The existence of corporations as legal entities is dependent on law, as is the extent to which corporations can enjoy that existence: corporate personality exists merely for legal and business convenience’14 The second claim concerns the public/private status of the corporation. Concession arguments were particularly prominent in legal writing during the first half of the nineteenth century. Recall from Chapter 1 that this was also the period during which liberal political theory was taking root. One problem for liberal thinkers was how to accommodate the growing popularity of the corporation as a form of legal organisation within a political ideology that viewed society as comprised primarily of the state and individual citizens, and in which the interests of the latter should prevail. The philosophical options were either to support the corporate form as a convenient device for the free and voluntary association of individuals, or to regard corporations as a state-sponsored threat to the rights of individuals. These different attitudes are evident in the works of thinkers such as John Stuart Mill and Adam Smith, referred to in Chapter 1. Concession theory seeks to resolve this tension by tying the corporation to the state, and preserving the political status of the individual: ‘the theory claims that a group as such has no rights unless the state chooses to grant it legal personality’!5 By controlling corporate activity, concession theory has the capacity to emphasise the wider public interest over the private interests of individuals involved in the corporation. Early judicial attitudes in England and the United States reflected this approach. In the mid-nineteenth century, it was established that, once incorporated, a company should only have the power to carry out activities of the type specified in its Memorandum of Association. As Lord Hatherley stated in the 1875 case of Ashbury Railway Carriage & Iron Co v Riche: [T]he Legislature has said, you may meet altogether, and form yourselves into a company, but in doing that you must tell all who may be disposed to deal with you the objects for which you have been associated !2 Early judicial attitudes in England and the United States reflected this approach. In the mid-nineteenth century, it was established that, once incorporated, a company should only have the power to carry out activities of the type specified in its Memorandum of Association. As Lord Hatherley stated in the 1875 case of Ashbury Railway Carriage & Iron Co v Riche: [T]he Legislature has said, you may meet altogether, and form yourselves into a company, but in doing that you must tell all who may be disposed to deal with you the objects for which you have been associated.12 Transactions outside the scope of the corporation's stated objects were invalid because they were beyond its powers (or‘ultra vires’). As will be seen in Chapter 5, the ultra vires doctrine has been abolished in Australia, but concession theory has continued to find expression in some judicial reasoning. For example, in a High Court decision in 1990, Brennan J stated that a company’s ‘existence, capacities and activities are only such as the law attributes to it’18 Another illustration can be found in Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd,12 where the High Court held that corporations are not entitled to claim the privilege against self-incrimination. In part, this decision was based on the view that, to use McHugh J's words, the corporation is an ‘artificial entity’ and a’‘creature of the law’22 Coming to the same conclusion, Mason CJ and Toohey J noted the approach in the United States which similarly denies the self-incrimination privilege to corporations. They cited the United States case of Hale v Henkel in which Brown J, relying on the concession theory, stated that: [T]he corporation is a creature of the State. It is presumed to be incorporated for the public. It receives certain privileges and franchises, and holds them subject to laws of the State and the limitations of its charter. Its powers are limited by law24 Concession theory has been invoked when courts seek to go behind the separate legal entity of the corporation and impose liability upon corporate officers. In summary, concession theory argues that incorporated activity is based on a presumption of state-imposed restrictions and regulations. It is a theory that is concerned with the status and role of corporations as legal and social actors. In particular, we can find aspects of concession theory in arguments, discussed later in this chapter, about the need for corporate social responsibility and in the idea that corporations are social enterprises.22 There are various criticisms of concession theory. One is that the theory has become irrelevant in a modern legal system that permits the creation of companies by a simple process of registration. Critics say that the theory made more sense at a time when grants of incorporation could be acquired only for specified purposes and only as the result of a Royal Charter from the Crown or a private Act of Parliament? In reply, it can be argued that the demise of the Royal Charter or private Act did not end the state's role in creating corporations Instead, that role shifted from Parliament to the executive arm of government. Other critics argue that the key attributes of incorporation—separate legal status, perpetual succession, limited liability of members—can be achieved by ordinary contractual or trust arrangements and therefore the state does not have a special role in creating or regulating corporations.“4 One response to this criticism is that even if it is possible to contractually mimic some of the features that flow from corporate status,2 the essential quality of separate corporate status lies beyond the capacity of ordinary contract.£ A final criticism is that concession theory, especially in its strong form, ‘is too authoritarian’ with respect to corporate enterprises.22 The argument here is that, ironically, rather than protecting individual rights such as freedom of association and rights to own property, the full application of concession theory threatens those rights because it makes corporations subject to‘the whims of government’22 A more nuanced approach would recognise the important role of self-regulation in the modern corporate sector. An underlying limitation of concession theory is that it does not have much to say about what goes on inside a corporation. An approach that does address internal corporate relations is aggregate theory. As we have seen, the advent of general incorporation legislation, and the accompanying rise in the number of incorporations, meant that the relevance of concession theory was questioned. Parliamentary permission for particular grants of incorporation was no longer required. Under the new general companies legislation, instead of the state creating corporations it was easier to think of each corporation as an exercise by individuals of their right of association. Aggregate theory pushes these individual rights to the fore. It begins with the premise that the corporation ‘has no existence or identity that is separate and apart from the natural persons in the corporation’22 There are different versions of aggregate theory—some making stronger claims than others. The early foundations for this theory were laid in judicial analyses at the turn of the twentieth century, which applied a contractual framework to questions of internal company management. In Automatic Self-Cleansing Filter Syndicate Co Ltd v Cuninghame,2 for example, the English Court of Appeal affirmed that a company’s constitution (then known as its Memorandum and Articles of Association*) formed a contract between members that regulates the internal affairs of the company. Internally, the corporation was regarded as an association (or aggregation) of individuals who are joined by mutual agreement. The earlier decision in Ashbury Railway Carriage & Iron Co v Riche showed that this contractual view could be accommodated within a mild version of concession theory: ‘The memorandum of association is as it were the area beyond which the action of the company cannot go, but inside that area they [the members] may make such regulations for their own government as they think fit 2 Most advocates of aggregate theory have taken a stronger line than this, conceding much less scope for the imposition of external legal constraints upon corporations. They ask why corporations should be subject to specialised regulatory regimes that differ from those applying to other contractual forms of association, such as partnerships. In this argument: [T]he authority of the sovereign toward the corporation ... is no greater and no less than its authority toward any other private agreement among contracting parties*3 This stronger version of aggregate theory asserts both the primary status of the individuals who comprise the corporation and the private status of the corporation. In this view, the role of the law should be confined to facilitating the formation of these contractual relationships. We have seen that the origins of contemporary Australian corporate law can be traced back to early forms of partnership.4 Today, the process of incorporation still involves the creation or adoption of corporate constitutional documents that specify the rights and powers of members and directors. Jennifer Hill observes that ‘company law in Australia has thus always had a strong contractual element to it’2> The current legal basis for this approach is discussed in Chapter 5. Contractual arguments continue to influence modern Australian and English judicial and legislative attitudes towards the exercise of managerial power within the corporation. According to one writer: By adopting a contractual conception of the company the legal model gives as the reason for the vesting of centralized authority to manage the company in the board of directors the contractual agreement of the owners of the company. Thus by invoking the idea of the freedom of a property owner to make any contract with respect to his property the power accorded to corporate managers appears legitimate, being the outcome of ordinary principles of freedom of contract.36 Since the 1970s, the preoccupation with justifying managerial power and autonomy within the corporation has led to the development of even stronger arguments that have their basis in aggregate theory. These arguments have drawn on the law and economics school of theory, and we consider them next. There are two principal strands of scholarship in the law and economics analysis of the corporation. One is agency theory, which addresses the problems that arise from the separation of the ownership (or investment) and the control (or management) functions in large corporations.22 The second strand is transaction-cost economics, which examines why different forms of economic organisation—for example, firms rather than markets—are used to organise and structure production relations in different situations.28 Although these two strands have different emphases and analytical approaches, they complement each other22 We can present an amalgamated description of these two approaches, due to their commonalities. 42 From an economic perspective, the corporation (a legal concept) is analysed as a type of firm (an economic concept). A firm consists of a series of transactions, or contracts, between individual actors such as investors, managers, employees, creditors and customers; it is, in effect, a version of the broader market. Agency theory describes this arrangement of the firm as‘a nexus of contracts’ As Jensen and Meckling explain it, the firm: ..- Serves as a nexus for contracting relationships and which is also characterized by the existence of divisible residual claims on the assets and cash flows of the organization which can generally be sold without permission of the other contracting individuals! In this context, the term ‘contract’ does not necessarily correspond to the strict legal idea of contract? Instead, contract is used to draw attention to the voluntary and adaptive nature of the arrangements made between the participants who comprise the firm. This economic framework denies the existence of the organisation as an entity that is separate from the individual contractors. As two pre-eminent law and economics theorists, Frank Easterbrook and Daniel Fischel, put it:‘[t]he “personhood” of a corporation is a matter of convenience rather than reality‘4? Furthermore, this perspective insists that the only relevant function of a company is to maximise the returns to individual investors. Thus, corporations should be treated in the same way as sole traders—they are simply different ways of organising business. Economic theory focuses on the fact that, in large firms, control is exercised by managers who act separately from a dispersed and diffuse group of investors who contribute capital to the business. Separating the management role from the capital contribution function allows management to be performed by specialists. The managers are ‘agents’ of the investors, although this term is not used in the strict legal sense. Economists also assume that the managers of the firm are rational economic actors who are guided by self-interest. This means there is always a risk they will use their discretionary powers to increase their own gains in ways that will not necessarily coincide with maximising the firm’s profits. Investors in the firm want to ensure that managers are operating the firm in a way that maximises profits rather than managerial self-interest. Investors will therefore incur‘monitoring costs, keeping an eye on the managers. For their part, managers want to retain their positions and will seek to assure investors that their interests will not be harmed. Managers will therefore incur‘bonding costs: The different costs incurred by both parties are referred to jointly as ‘agency costs’44 Contracts between managers and investors are meant to minimise these agency costs (or, in the language of transaction-cost economics, reduce managerial opportunism). This is done by including protective provisions in the contract that deal with conflicts of interest, disclosure requirements, and so on. However, for a number of reasons, the process of negotiating and monitoring the performance of these contracts is imperfect. Investors are limited in the amount of time and knowledge they can devote to negotiations, keeping informed about the firm’s performance, analysing financial data provided by the firm, and attending general meetings. In firms with widespread ownership, the prospects of collective action amongst investors will be small, so there is little prospect of sharing the burden of monitoring management of the firm. In summary, the transaction costs of negotiating effective contracts are high, and the prospects of effective monitoring are low. Applying this analysis to companies, the economic framework highlights two mechanisms that reduce transaction costs and act as an efficient substitute for investor monitoring of management behaviour. The first mechanism is the operation of various market forces, in particular: (1) The market for corporate securities: in an efficient capital market, the price of a company’s shares is assumed to reflect all available information about that company.4? One piece of information is the terms of the corporate contract and the degree of protection that they offer to shareholders. In effect, the market does the job of monitoring the company that would otherwise be done by the investors, thereby reducing agency costs. (2) The market for corporate control: in an efficient market, underperforming companies will be taken over by those who place a higher value on the company’s assets. This prospect provides an incentive for the company’s current directors and managers to aim for performance, lest they be displaced as a result of a takeover42 (3) The market for company managers: economists argue that ‘competition for managerial services, both inside and outside the company, encourages managers to act in shareholders’ best interests‘4® This is said to control the risk of abuse of managerial power because directors and managers are aware that if they do not maximise the value of the company they will not be re-elected or re-appointed. According to economic theory, the operation of these competitive market forces supplies information about companies and constrains the misuse of corporate power. The second mechanism is a system of corporate law rules. The key features of modern corporate law, such as separate legal status, limited liability, and mandatory directors’ duties of care and loyalty, are said to operate as a set of standard contractual terms that are read into each corporate constitution. As Easterbrook and Fischel describe it: [C]orporate law is a set of terms available off-the-rack so that participants in corporate ventures can save the costs of contracting. ... Corporate law—and in particular the fiduciary principle enforced by the courts—fills in the blanks and oversights with the terms that people would have bargained for had they anticipated the problems and been able to contract costlessly in advance. On this view corporate law supplements but never displaces actual bargains. This passage emphasises the private and voluntary nature of corporate relationships within the economic framework. Corporate law has a facilitating role, providing a set of ‘default’ rules which allow for tailor-made contracts to be constructed in specific instances. Individuals establishing a corporation should have the freedom to opt out of statutory or judicially created rules and to construct their own contractual arrangements. Some law and economics writers take a less stringent view, suggesting the idea that corporate law ought to prescribe some mandatory rules and impose some duties and responsibilities in order to correct potential problems which arise from the agency relationship 22 In summary, this contract-based analysis treats the corporation as a shorthand expression for a multiplicity of private, consensual, contract-based relations between economic actors, each seeking to maximise his or her own benefits. The corporation is regarded not as a creation of the state, but of private initiative and enterprise. In Brudney’s cautious estimation, one advantage of this view over other theories is that it ‘aids in illuminating the internal operation of the firm ... [Dlecomposing the enterprise advances understanding beyond that offered by the entity concept in law. Law and economics analysis has had a lot of support in corporate law scholarship, particularly in the United States. It also has its critics.52 One criticism points to the reliance on the idea of contract. In law and economic theory, complex relationships within the corporation are reduced to binary exchanges between individual actors, the purpose of which is to maximise returns to individual members. The idea of the corporation as an organisation is either downplayed or ignored. The role of key corporate players, such as shareholders, is reduced to a set of ‘inputs’ into a‘web of voluntary agreements’=3 Another criticism is that a contractual paradigm regards corporations as private entities, and corporate law as a body of rules that facilitates private, voluntary, individual agreements. Consequently, as Kent Greenfield observes, ‘[b]ecause corporations are seen as private creations, corporate law is insulated from politics and concerns about the public interest’=4 This ignores the prominent public and social impact that many corporations exert, and the consequent expectation that they might meet certain wider, social standards; for example, those standards relating to human rights or the environment.22 This argument is examined later in this chapter in the discussion of corporate social responsibility. When productive activity of some sort requires the financial input and effort of multiple people in a team or group, it can be difficult to attribute any particular part of the outputs or benefits of that activity to any particular person's contribution to producing them. This problem applies to corporations, especially if we expand the category of people providing inputs from only shareholders to include employees, managers, creditors and others. The problems that are said to arise include ’shirking, where individual members of the team do not put in as much effort as others to achieve the most profitable outcomes, preferring to ‘free ride’ on the efforts of others knowing that they will still get a share of the resulting benefits. Another potential problem is ‘rent-seeking, where team members spend a lot of effort and group resources arguing with each other about the size of their share of the group’s outputs. One way to avoid these problems could be to use individual contracts to lock in each team member's claim in advance. In anything but the smallest group, however, that will likely be an expensive and time-consuming exercise. Team production theory seeks to address these problems and, at the same time, supply an explanation for why corporations are structured as they are. As it applies to corporations, this theory says that when individual contracts are not feasible, the ‘second best’ way to address these problems is to rely on the law. As described by Margaret Blair and Lynn Stout (the originators of this theory),2° corporate law offers a solution to team production problems by requiring team members to hand over certain rights (such as rights over the team’s joint output) to the corporation. As a separate entity, the corporation then owns the team assets; the use of those assets is determined by an internal hierarchy of authority that is dominated by the board of directors. In this way, as Blair and Stout see it: [t]he team production model of the public corporation both highlights and explains the essential economic function served by that otherwise puzzling institution, the board of directors. Team production theory seeks to address a difficulty that lies at the heart of the ‘agency model, described earlier: if directors are said to be the agents of the shareholders, why are the rights and powers of shareholders so limited when it comes to controlling the directors? The answer, according to team production theory, is that instead of being there simply to look after shareholders’ interests, the role of directors is to: protect the enterprise-specific investments of all the members of the corporate ‘team; including shareholders, managers, rank and file employees, and possibly other groups, such as creditors. In this view, the board of directors is a‘mediating hierarchy’ that operates independently of all the various constituencies that make up the corporation. Team production theory shares some common ground with economic theories of the corporation, in so far as it sees the corporation as comprised of a nexus of multiple inputs (in this case, investments), and it uses the criterion of economic efficiency as its benchmark. Ironically, because it argues that shareholders are not the only or primary team members, it also shares some ground with stakeholder theories, which we examine later in this chapter, but with the proviso that directors are not under the control of any particular members of the corporate team. One critique of the team production model is that it does not address the question of who monitors or provides oversight of the work of the directors. If shareholders are not the primary set of interests to be considered by directors, then their incentive to monitor is decreased. A different criticism is that, because the interests of team members will not necessarily be the same, the board must seek to balance them in some way. That, in turn, provides an incentive for team members to engage in ‘rent-seeking’ behaviour, to gain favourable outcomes from the board which, in turn, imposes costs on company This theory makes two claims. The first claim is that corporations are a natural product of human interaction and initiative. Corporate law does not therefore create corporations; instead, it simply gives formal recognition and public legitimacy to their existence. This theory was popular in the early 1900s. According to one commentator, early writers: saw corporations as natural expressions of desires of the corporators. Consequently, corporations obtained their political and thus legal status independently from the state. From this independence was inferred autonomy ... that demanded the respect and consequent restraint of the state. This line of thought was supported by arguments about the inevitability of economic concentration. The emergence of ‘big business’ was the result of natur- al, impersonal market forces.©2 The second claim made by natural entity theory is that a corporation has an existence separate from its members and managers. This asserts that the corporation is a‘group-person, possessing its own group will and with its own capacity for action. A strong version of this theory was described in the late nineteenth century by the German legal philosopher Otto von Gierke, who argued that ‘[e]very group has a real and independent communal life, a conscious will, and an ability to act that are distinct from the lives and wills of its individual members’®2 One legal feature underlying this claim is that corporations can remain in existence, with the same corporate identity, even though membership and management of the entity changes over time. Aless emphatic version of this theory—sometimes called ‘organic theory’'—uses the human body as an analogy for the corporation, with directors being likened to the mind of the company. This organic version of natural entity theory is frequently referred to in cases dealing with the criminal or civil liability of a corporation. The idea of a corporate mind allows legal concepts such as mens rea, which are premised on the actions of individual human actors, to be applied to corporations without making significant changes to the substantive criminal law or notions of individual responsibility =4 Natural entity theory differs from aggregate and economic theories because it treats the corporation as more than a set of individual contractual relations between shareholders.© It agrees with concession theory that there is a point in recognising the corporation has a separate existence apart from its members. It differs from concession theory, however, in that it regards the corporation as a real or natural entity, rather than an artificial construct dependent on the state for recognition. According to natural entity theory, ‘the state does not create the corporation, but rather recognises an entity that maintains itself independent of that recognition’®= Natural entity arguments appeared in Anglo-American legal writing partly as a response to a difficulty in early versions of aggregate theory. If corporations were nothing more than contractual arrangements, then how could the grant of legal privileges—such as perpetual succession, limited liability and separate legal status—which were not generally associated with other commercial contractual relationships, such as partnerships, be justified? The natural entity theorist’s answer is that these are not privileges. Instead, they simply reflect the ‘true’ or ‘real’ nature of the corporation. Corporate law is not a set of default contract terms (as law and economics theory says), nor is it essential to the existence of the corporation (as concession theory insists). This theory is sceptical of the role of corporate law in general. If corporations are the natural product of private initiative,*2 then there is no reason why they should be regulated more closely than ordinary individuals or partnerships. Natural entity theory appears to arrive at a similar conclusion to aggregate theory. Another consequence of this argument is that if corporations are natural entities, they should be entitled to the same rights and privileges, and be held to the same standards and re- sponsibilities, as natural persons. We now consider another theory or, more accurately, a disciplinary approach that regards corporations from a group perspective. Judicial and legislative attempts to respond to the problems of corporate misbehaviour are limited by a restricted view about what happens ‘inside’ the corporation. As discussed later in this book, the basic legal view regards the corporation as a collection of individuals (members and directors) who are bound together by specific legal relations. The difficulty with this view, as one corporate law writer says, is that: ‘corporate practitioners and legal academicians tend to view the corporation as a “black box” which need not be understood in its internal workings in order to be operated’®8 From the perspective of political scientists, sociologists and communications theorists, corporations—especially large corporations—should be understood as complex organisational environments that determine the status of, and shape the decisions made by, the individuals and groups who work in and with them.£* These organisational environments are made up of formal and informal networks of communications, understandings, and behaviour patterns that link corporate insiders. Organisational theory suggests that the larger the organisation the more likely it is that the flow of information up and down the organisational hierarchy will be distorted and the exercise of control will become diffuse. Research shows that in such situations the board of directors is likely to have only a limited impact on decision-making in the corporation. Furthermore, corporate decisions will not be the product of routine procedure and rational deliberation. Instead, they will be the result of‘an amalgam of independent decisions, a compromise among the views of several teams, or the relatively unalloyed preference of a certain subset of players’22 The organisational perspective emphasises that corporations are decision-making organisations. This refers to the many informal decisions that are made on a daily basis by corporate managers and employees, as well as the fewer number of formal decisions made at general meetings of members and meetings of the board of directors. Decision-making processes within any one corporation are likely to vary depending on the type of decision. As one writer has noted: Explanation of corporate decision making should not be based upon [the] conception of a corporation as an organic, unified enti [D]ifferent aspects of corporations become relevant with respect to particular decision-making contexts. For example, the dimensions of a corporation which are pertinent to decisions about an industrial relations problem may be radically different from those which are pertinent to choice between alternative sources of finance. Importantly, organisational theories direct our attention to how decisions are made, not just to the outcome or effect of those decisions: Corporate decisions can be assessed not just by the efficiency or fairness of their results, but also by assessing the quality of all of the formal and informal processes that are involved in reaching those decisions. According to one argument, corporate decision-making processes can be assessed according to three criteria: accountability, deliberation and contestability.2 Accountability requires corporate officeholders to explain their use of office and power, paying attention to matters such as conflict of interest. The idea of deliberation is that corporate decision-making should be based on consideration of all relevant arguments. Finally, contestability refers to the realistic possibility that corporate decisions can be contested where they conflict with the corporation's interests. One set of questions raised by this perspective concerns the ethical responsibility of individuals within the corporation. If internal corporate norms and rules shape and determine decision-making, then is the ethical responsibility of individuals in the corporation enhanced or diminished? Corporate lawyers have not given much attention to the effect of hierarchies within corporations on an individual's capacity to make ethically defensible decisions. Instead, this has been the subject of sociological inquiry. In a study of large American corporations conducted in the 1980s, sociologist Robert Jackall observed that: Bureaucracy transforms all moral issues into immediately practical concerns. A moral judgment based on a professional ethic makes little sense in a world where the etiquette of authority relationships and the necessity for protecting and covering for one’s boss, one’s network, and oneself supersede all other considerations. 4 Organisational theory invites us to consider how this perspective fits with a body of corporate law based on objective standards of honest behaviour and proper conduct intended to apply to all corporations. An important implication of this work is that there will often be a divergence between the leqal desiqWhen one begins to explore the relationship between corporations, corporate law and gender, the immediate impression is that women and their perspectives are invisible. Debates about the role of corporations and their constituents seem to be viewed through masculine perspectives and cultures that emphasise ideas and values such as power, authority and duty.2° Similarly, much of the language that pervades corporate law discourse has a strongly combative and masculine tone: for example, takeovers are conducted by ‘raiders’ who engage in a ‘battle’ with the ‘target’ company, hoping that there are no‘white knights; ‘scorched earth; ‘poison pill’ or ‘crown jewels’ defences to defeat their bid. Nevertheless, there have been important feminist analyses of the many issues embedded in the corporate world, leading some to categorise the corporation as inherently gendered.“ To some extent, feminist analysis of corporations and corporate law emerged out of a disagreement with law and economics contractual theories and a sympathy towards the view that corporations encompass a wider range of interests and constituencies beyond shareholders.22 In an early contribution, Kathleen Lahey and Sarah Salter suggested that feminist critiques of the corporation can be grouped under three headings.72 The first is liberal feminism, which concentrates on the need for gender equality in society at large, and within corporate organisations in particular. This perspective accepts the organisational structure of the corporation as given and looks for ways in which women can overcome marginalisation and exclusion in the corporate environment. Some liberal feminist writers have studied the effects those structures have on individual behaviour.22 They conclude that, in a hierarchical corporate structure, each individual is responsible for changing his or her situation. This diverts attention from the responsibility which the organisation has for the unequal treatment of female and male employees. The solution offered is for corporations to recognise and enforce individual rights to equal treatment and equal pay. This solution falls short of trying to create organisational structures that distribute and decentralise power and authority. Lahey and Salter describe the second category as ‘socialist feminism: Here, the perspective lies outside the corporation. In their words, ‘socialist feminist analysis is more concerned with the effect of corporatism on the larger culture, and on the role of women as workers in that culture’®! Socialist feminists argue that corporations dominate the capacity for individual action in modern society. Historically, modern business corporations were developed as instruments to be used by the owners of private property. Instead, it is the individual managers and workers that have become the agents and instrumentalities of the corporations. The lives of women, as workers in both the corporation and the home, become doubly devalued in this corporation-determined social order. The third category is radical feminist literature and ‘explores the reasons behind the development of the corporate form in the first place and the role that it plays in serving the needs of liberal and capitalist patriarchy’®2 Radical feminists argue that modern society is fundamentally shaped by male values, embedded in dichotomies such as public versus private, individual versus group, or self-interest versus cooperation. In business, the emphasis on pursuing individual self-interest and competitive profit-maximisation and property acquisition are examples of this.2 The hierarchical image of the corporation which is promoted by corporate law is cited as further evidence. Large corporations, being bureaucratic organisations, are centrally concerned with maintaining discipline and control. Bureaucratic control is exercised by methods of separation, isolation, and depersonalization, as well as depowerment of the individuals, knowledge, and activities that it organizes’®4 Feminist legal theorists identified these as components of a distinctly male view of the individual's role in society. In contrast, they emphasise the obligations of care, responsibility and responsiveness which corporate participants owe to each other.22 There is a body of work that analyses specific corporate law issues from feminist perspectives.2° As summarised by Testy, some of this work criticises the idea that shareholders should be the sole focus of directors’ concerns, arguing that a wider constituency of interests should be considered. Instead of the nexus of contracts posited by law and economics theory, some feminist writers view the firm as a‘web of relationships, only some of which are prescribed by law; for example, director-shareholder.22 Other work argues that ‘feminist insights into concepts of care and connection can and should give increased substantive content to director and officer duties’; and there are arguments directed at the effect the exercise of corporate power has on individuals, especially women£2 Following from this, there is considerable debate about the importance of gender diversity on company boards. There is some evidence that board gender diversity can positively affect a board’s monitoring role because ‘women on boards ask more questions’®2 Several countries, especially in Europe, have enacted rules that specify quotas for gender representation. As an example, since 2006, Norway has required all public companies to have a minimum of both genders represented on their boards. The prescribed minimum varies according to the size of the board.2° The thinking behind these legislative initiatives is summed up by Peta Spender: [T]he participation of women on boards is a measure of economic citizenship and democratic leadership, and therefore the percentage of women on boards should reflect their workforce participation 2 Other commentators raise concerns that imposing quotas might lead to token appointments or misperceptions that women board members are merely making up the numbers.22 An important question prompted by the theories we have discussed is whether corporations should be confined to the pursuit of profits for the benefit of shareholders or whether they should have regard to wider concerns, including the environmental and social impact of their operations. In short, what is the underlying purpose of the corporation as a legal, economic and social structure? For example, from a natural entity perspective in which corporations have a status analogous to natural persons, then presumably they should be bound by similar social and ethical expectations and obligations to those of other citizens. This position was elaborated in a famous article by Harvard law professor E Merrick Dodd, published in 1932.2 He argued that, because corporations are natural entities, they have social responsibilities in addition to their profit-making goals. Dodd was critical of the traditional legal view of corporations as essentially private organisations run for the exclusive benefit of the owner-shareholders. In his view, because the corporate entity is not merely an aggregate of shareholders, and because the shareholders in modern public corporations have become ‘absentee owners’ who are separated from the processes of corporate management, the directors should not be regarded merely as agents of the shareholders.4 Directors must make decisions in the interests of the corporation as a separate entity and should expect that the corporation’s interests as a ‘good citizen’ will not always accord with the interests of its shareholders. In Dodd’s argument, this means that directors are justified in making decisions which favour interests other than the shareholders; such as those of the company’s employees, consumers of its products, the local communities in which the company operates, and the environment. As long as these decisions can be justified in terms of the corporation's obligations as a ‘good citizen; then any objections raised by the shareholders can be overridden. To assist corporations in discharging this social function, representatives of interests other than the shareholders, such as employees, could be appointed to the board of directors. Dodd's argument called for a fundamental reconceptualisation of the corporation, moving away from an exclusive focus on shareholders’ rights to include the interests of society. It is an argument that has been raised many times since, under a variety of labels. In earlier editions of this book, we grouped these arguments under the heading ‘corporate social responsibility’ (CSR). While CSR concerns continue to be expressed, they have since been subsumed into a broad debate about ‘corporate purpose’ in which a focal point is the responsibility of corporations for the pursuit of environmental, social and governance (ESG) standards. While there is debate about the scope of the three words in ESG, most commentators agree that ‘environmental’ includes sustainability and climate-change matters; ‘social’ includes maintaining ethical standards in company operations; and ‘governance’ includes an expectation that company boards should behave accountably and transparently.2> In the vast literature on the debate about ESG (and CSR),°° there are arguments, based on the idea of ‘shareholder primacy’ that corporations should have the maximisation of returns to shareholders as their primary focus. Only if it is consistent with that goal should corporations be altruistic and take into account wider social, welfare or environmental concerns. A variant of this argument is that directors should not focus exclusively on achieving short-term profits for the company but should take a long-term approach in which costly but ethical investments today will yield returns for shareholders in the long term. This perspective has been given the label ‘enlightened shareholder value; and we return to it below. At the other end of the spectrum, there are arguments that corporations must be regarded primarily as public actors and that shareholder interests should not take precedence over the concerns of the wider constituency of groups and people who can be affected by the company’s activities or who, conversely, can affect the company’s ability to carry out its operations. This can include suppliers, creditors, employees, customers, communities in which the company’s operations are based, and public interest pressure groups. This is sometimes called ‘stakeholder theory’, because this wider group of interests has a ‘stake’ in what the company does. Again, we discuss this in more detail later in this chapter. Not surprisingly, these arguments have received criticism from a range of perspectives. One critique is that it is not appropriate for directors to take into account interests or concerns other than those of the shareholders to whom they owe their primary and direct legal duties. The renowned economist Milton Friedman was one such critic; his argument was summed up in the title of one of his papers: ’The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits:22 Related to this is the concern that requiring corporate managers to consider broad social responsibilities when making decisions would expose them to a vague and undefined standard of conduct and impede effective decision-making. Finally, another set of criticisms takes a more cynical view, arguing that concerns for ESG (or CSR) are an exercise in corporate ‘window dressing’ or public image protection that deflects critical attention away from deeper concerns about the misuse or exploitation of corporate power.

## 2.45.05 Enlightened shareholder value

Areuimante in faviauir nf a hroad carnarata nurnace hava raraivad mivad racnancac fram laniclatare In the Unitad Kinadam tha natian af carnarate nurnace, Not surprisingly, these arguments have received criticism from a range of perspectives. One critique is that it is not appropriate for directors to take into account interests or concerns other than those of the shareholders to whom they owe their primary and direct legal duties. The renowned economist Milton Friedman was one such critic; his argument was summed up in the title of one of his papers: ’The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits:22 Related to this is the concern that requiring corporate managers to consider broad social responsibilities when making decisions would expose them to a vague and undefined standard of conduct and impede effective decision-making. Finally, another set of criticisms takes a more cynical view, arguing

## 2.45.05 Enlightened shareholder value

Arguments in favour of a broad corporate purpose have received mixed responses from legislators. In the United Kingdom, the notion of corporate purpose have been given statutory recognition under the label ‘enlightened shareholder value’ This idea begins from the orthodox proposition that directors must act in the best interests of the shareholders, but urges this be done by ‘striking a balance between the competing interests of different stakeholders in order to benefit the shareholders in the long run’22 This is now reflected in s 172(1) of the Companies Act 2006 (UK), which, under the heading ‘Duty to promote the success of the company; provides that: (1) A director of a company must act in a way that he [sic] considers, in good faith, would be most likely to promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members as a whole, and in doing so have regard (amongst other matters) to— (a) the likely consequences of any decision in the long term; (b) the interests of the company’s employees;

(c) the need to foster the company’s business relationships with suppliers, customers and others; (d) the impact of the company’s operations on the community and the environment,

(e) the desirability of the company maintaining a reputation for high standards of business conduct; and (f) the need to act fairly between the members of the company.

This section maintains the idea that the company’s members are the sole focus for directors, but it‘seeks to provide a broader context for fulfilling that duty“! The section has been criticised on the one hand because’ alll it requires is that the director should think about’ interests beyond those of the members.121 Courts in the United Kingdom have affirmed that'[iJt is for the directors themselves to determine the weight to be attached to the list of factors referred to in s.172. The weighing of factors is a commercial decision, which the Court is ill-equipped to take, except in a clear case’! By contrast, and with two exceptions noted below, Australian corporate law does not expressly refer to broader social or other responsibilities. There is no equivalent 7A

## 2.45.05 Enlightened shareholder value (b) the interests of the company’s employees;
of the UK section in the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth), although the idea has been considered on a number of occasions. In its 1989 review of the duties and obligations of company directors, the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs concluded that the interests of groups other than shareholders are best covered by specific legislation dealing with industrial relations, trade practices, and consumer and environmental protection. The Committee argued that ‘to require directors to take into account the social impact their decisions might have would be an extension of Australian company law fraught with most important consequences’!“3 This argument was repeated by the Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee in its 2006 report on corporate social responsibility, which cautioned that ‘a non-exhaustive catalogue of interests to be taken into account serves little useful purpose for directors and affords them no guidance on how various interests are to be weighed, prioritised or reconciled’ The two exceptions can be found in s 299(1)(f) of the Corporations Act, which requires the annual directors’ report to give details of the company’s performance in relation to any environmental regulation that applies to the company’s operations, and in the Treasury Laws Amendment (Financial Market Infrastructure and Other Measures) Act 2024, which requires all companies with financial reporting requirements to publish an annual ‘sustainability report’ on climate-related matters.1°> Outside the parameters of the Corporations Act, the Listing Rules of the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) require a company listed on ASX to include a ‘corporate governance statement in its annual report to the ASX.1°° That statement must indicate the extent to which the company has followed the ASX’s Corporate Governance Council's Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations. If those Principles and Recommendations have not been followed, the company must explain why not. Principle 3 requires a listed entity to act legally, ethically and responsibly, emphasising that: Investors and the broader community expect a listed entity to act lawfully, ethically and responsibly and that expectation should be reflected in its statement of values. In formulating its values, a listed entity should consider what behaviours are needed from its officers and employees to build long term sustainable value for its security holders. This includes the need for the entity to preserve and protect its reputation and standing in the community and with The two exceptions can be found in s 299(1)(f) of the Corporations Act, which requires the annual directors’ report to give details of the company’s performance in relation to any environmental regulation that applies to the company’s operations, and in the Treasury Laws Amendment (Financial Market Infrastructure and Other Measures) Act 2024, which requires all companies with financial reporting requirements to publish an annual ‘sustainability report’ on climate-related matterskey stakeholders, such as customers, employees, suppliers, creditors, law makers and regulators1%

## 2.45.10 Stakeholder theory

We noted earlier that there are arguments that corporations should have direct responsibilities to a wider range of interests beyond their members. These arguments are usually grouped under the heading of ‘stakeholder theory’. Stakeholder theory emerged partly as a response to economic contract-based theories about the corporation. Contract-based theorists concentrate on relations between shareholders and directors or managers, placing emphasis on the pursuit of shareholder wealth maximisation. Stakeholder theory regards corporations as comprised of other important constituencies in addition to shareholders. These non-shareholder constituencies include corporate employees, secured and unsecured creditors, customers or clients, and the local communities in which corporations operate. The proposition is that non-shareholder stakeholders are unlikely or unable to protect their interests by using private contracts with each corporation. Accordingly, in addition to contract law, a system of public corporate regulation is needed because corporations are institutions whose conduct can have significant public ramifications. Once more, there are many varieties of stakeholder theory, partly because the term ‘stakeholder’ has no fixed definition. Versions of this theory range from the idea of enlightened shareholder value, which we have discussed above, to communitarian theory, which says that ‘all those involved in the corporation are potentially members of one community; while they clearly have significantly divergent interests, needs, and values, they also have some significant shared goals and bonds‘!°8 One general feature of stakeholder theory is that it avoids classifying corporations either as exclusively private arrangements (as economic theory does) or as purely public creations (as concession theory sometimes does). As one writer has described it: Corporations really are both private and public simultaneously. They are not states; they carry out economic activities for a profit, a profit that justifiably is returned to those who take the risk of investing in what they do. At the same time, corporations are not purely private individuals. They are institutions that sometimes act as quasi-governments and, even when they do not, they take actions that affect every aspect of people's lives, including people who have no formal contractual relationship with them.122 Stakeholder theory challenges several aspects of contemporary corporate law structure, such as the nature of directors’ duties (should they be owed just to shareholders?), the key stakeholders, such as customers, employees, suppliers, creditors, law makers and regulators 122

## 2.45.10 Stakeholder theory
rights of shareholders (what sort of rights should arise out of share ownership?), and the mechanisms of corporate governance (should non-shareholders be represented on the board? Should general meetings be open to non-shareholders?).

## 2.45.15 Global developments

At the end of Chapter 1, we noted that Australian corporate law increasingly operates in a global context. This is especially so for arguments about stakeholderism and ESG reporting. Concern about the global impact of corporate operations has seen the promulgation of a large number of international guidelines, norms, standards, and codes focused on promoting responsible corporate behaviour, particularly with regard to human rights. Some of these initiatives are developed by inter-governmental bodies, some by industry bodies, and some by international non-governmental organisations (NGOs). Three examples illustrate the scope of these international initiatives. First, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)’s Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises on Responsible Business Conduct. These voluntary principles and standards, first formulated in 1976 and since revised, are recommendations to multinational enterprises. They are not legally enforceable, although the matters covered by the Guidelines may be regulated by national laws or other international obligations. The Guidelines set out a number of general policies for multinational enterprises. The first two policies state that such enterprises should ‘[clontribute to economic, environmental and social progress with a view to achieving sustainable development; and ‘[rlespect the internationally recognised human rights of those affected by their activities:12 Second, the United Nations Global Compact. This non-binding initiative, established in 2000, encourages companies to ‘do business responsibly’ by aligning their operations to 10 principles on human rights, labour, the environment and anti-corruption.“ The principles are drawn from the Universal Declaration of

## 2.45.15 Global developments

First, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)'s Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises on Responsible Business Conduct. These voluntary principles and standards, first formulated in 1976 and since revised, are recommendations to multinational enterprises. They are not legally enforceable, although the matters covered by the Guidelines may be regulated by national laws or other international obligations. The Guidelines set out a number of general policies for multinational enterprises. The first two policies state that such enterprises should ‘[c]ontribute to economic, environmental and social progress with a view to achieving sustainable development; and ‘[rlespect the internationally recognised human rights of those affected by their activities:112 Second, the United Nations Global Compact. This non-binding initiative, established in 2000, encourages companies to ‘do business responsibly’ by aligning their operations to 10 principles on human rights, labour, the environment and anti-corruption. The principles are drawn from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Labour Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, and the United Nations Convention Against Corruption.One concern of the Global Compact is the extent to which global supply chains are dependent on forms of modern slavery, including forced or compulsory labour, child labour and debt bondage. In Australia, the Modern Slavery Act 2018 (Cth) requires some corporations to report annually on the risks of modern slavery in their operations and supply chains. A review of the operation of the Act in 2023 found, however, that because of problems with enforceability, ‘[m]odern slavery reporting is not being taken seriously enough’ and that reporting by a number of corporations was‘a tick-box exercise’1!4 The Compact has been criticised because it does not specify how companies are to implement the standards: ‘[t]he concern is that comy115 panies may enhance their reputations simply by signing the Compact without making serious commitments to operating in a sustainable fashion’+ Third, the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights" (adopted by the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2011). The Principles focus on human rights and apply both to states and to corporations within their jurisdictions. Among other things, the Principles provide that States should set out clear expectations about respect for human rights by all business enterprises in their jurisdiction. This responsibility to respect human rights requires business enterprises to‘avoid causing or contributing to adverse human rights impacts through their own activities‘1"7 The commentary to the Principles notes that ‘the responsibility to respect human rights is a global standard of expected conduct for all business enterprises wherever they operate ... it exists over and above compliance with national laws and regulations protecting human rights’!12 Importantly, the ‘responsibility’ outlined in the Principles does not equate to a legal obligation for corporations to observe human rights.1!2 Nevertheless, the idea of a corporate responsibility to respect human rights ‘poses a challenge for corporate governance theory’ because the standard model of corporate law in countries such as the United Kingdom (and Australia), which gives primary attention to the rights and interests of shareholders, ‘may be inadequate to deal with the complex changes in governance and regula- tion that such a responsibility would appear to impose on corporations.!22 We began this chapter by emphasising the importance of corporate theory. Corporate law might be thought of solely as an essentially pragmatic discipline— as a set of rules and doctrines designed to facilitate the achievement of collective goals through the medium of the corporate form. But corporate law is not value-free. Each rule and doctrine embodies (or, at least, permits) a choice about the law’s position on fundamental questions, such as whether corporations are essentially private entities, how the interests of an individual shareholder should be weighed against those of the majority, or whether corporations should be held to account for their impact on climate change. Understanding the rules and doctrines of corporate law is essential. By becoming aware of the main theoretical frameworks that influence the development of modern corporate law, and noticing how they take different positions on those fundamental questions, we are in a better position to develop a critical understanding of the legal rules and doctrines that make up corporate law. None of the different theories we have discussed is intrinsically ‘better’ than the others; each has its strengths and weaknesses. Each theory gives a different position from which to argue for or against a particular legislative initiative or judicial interpretation. We began this chapter by referring back to four sets of issues or debates that underpin corporate law: (1) whether and how to recognise the interests of the corporation as a group entity versus those of the individuals in the company; (2) the extent to which management of the company should operate separately from the members as the notional ‘owners’ of the company; (3) whether the role of the law should merely be to facilitate the capacity of people to form and operate corporations or to be more interventionist or regulatory; and (4) whether corporations are to be regarded as private economic and social actors or as a significant part of the public dimension of social and economic life. Each of the theories and perspectives we have looked at says something different about these debates. We conclude this chapter by summarising the different positions. Each of the theories or perspectives we have looked at has many different permutations and so we must be cautious about over-generalising. Concession theory ties the existence of corporations to the will of the state; it regards corporations as public bodies, even though they may act for private purposes. Consequently, concession theory presumes corporate law must have a role, not only in creating corporations but in specifying and regulating the conditions for their continued existence. Concession theory says little about the internal governance of corporations. In contrast, aggregate theory and the law and economics arguments begin from a strong private and individualistic premise. This is summed up in the idea that a corporation can be regarded as a ‘nexus of contracts’ Accordingly, there is a presumption that the law has no greater role to play in regulating corporations than it has for other contract-based forms of enterprise (for example, partnerships). Unlike other theoretical perspectives, law and economics theory pays attention to the relations between the individual players within the corporation: When we look at corporations and corporate law through a contractual lens we are able to see some things quite clearly (for example, the different roles played by various participants in the corporate enterprise, and the need to assess the variable impact of market forces and legal rules on them)21 Team production theory develops the ‘nexus of contracts’ idea into a broader idea about the corporation as a privately constructed ‘team’ in which participants each contribute towards the production of the group's outputs. This theory does not give special status to the shareholders; it recognises a wider range of inputs. It does, however, prioritise the role of directors in making decisions about the allocation of the benefits produced by the team, and it emphasises the importance of the corporation’s separate legal status as the owner of team assets. Natural entity theory shares with aggregate theory the idea that corporations are the product of private initiative which the law should facilitate rather than regulate. But unlike aggregate (or law and economics) theory it treats the corporate entity—the group—as a social construct, not merely a collection of indi- viduals. The sum, says this theory, is greater than its parts. Each of these theories has something to say about the status of ‘the corporation’ The remaining perspectives described in this chapter focus on the behaviour and impact of corporate operations on people within the corporation and on society. Organisational theories invite us to think about the ways corporations operate as decision-making structures. This is an internal perspective on the corporation, examining how the organisational setting can affect and shape the actions of individual corporate actors. Organisational theories have less to say about questions of whether corporations are public or private actors, or the role of the law in relation to them. Feminist theorists shed light on the internal aspects of corporate life, as well as taking an ‘external’ view. Some writers point to the effect of internal corporate hierarchies on the prospects for gender equality, while others study the role of corporations in society and their role in perpetuating patterns of disempowerment for women. Next, this chapter considered the perspectives that can be grouped under the idea of ‘corporate purpose; including the ‘enlightened shareholder value’ and ‘stakeholder’ arguments, with the latter posing a challenge to the standard legal model of the corporation that focuses on shareholder interests. At the risk of generalisation, these arguments recognise that corporations are private entities, but emphasise the public role that they do, or can, play. While some advocates press for ESG and similar concerns to be enshrined in legal requirements, others see more capacity in self-regulation or industry standards. Finally, we noted that corporate law operates in a wider global context. We described some examples of the international guidelines and principles that can affect the ways in which corporations operate transnationally and, by implication, domestically. Thie chantar nencantad > callaction af thanring and narenactiine that ren imnartant ta undarctand camnestions and thairlanal eacial acanamic and nolitical 1 in this chapter, we will use the terms ‘corporation’ and ‘company’ interchangeably. Note that in strict legal terms, the ‘company’ is a subset of the broader class of entities called ‘corporations. This is explained in detail in Chapter 4. 2 Jeffrey Nesteruk, ‘Legal Persons and Moral Worlds: Ethical Choices within the Corporate Environment’ (1991) 29(1) American Business Law Journal 75. 2 See Chapter 1 at Section 1.10. 4 Susanna Kim Ripken, Corporate Personhood (Cambridge University Press, 2019) 21. 3 The following works are of use: Eric W Orts, Business Persons: A Legal Theory of the Firm (Oxford University Press, 2013); F Hallis, Corporate Personality (Oxford University Press, 1930); S Stoljar, Groups and Entities: An Inquiry into Corporate Theory (ANU Press, 1973); LC Webb (ed), Legal Personality and Political Pluralism (Melbourne University Press, 1958); M Wolff, ‘On the Nature of Legal Persons’ (1938) 54(4) Law Quarterly Review 494; Lorraine Talbot, Great Debates in Company Law (Palgrave, 2014); Susanna Kim Ripken, Corporate Personhood (Cambridge University Press, 2019) 21). This is sometimes called ‘fiction theory’ For reasons outlined in the text, we think this latter description is misleading. Fiction theory is discussed in $ Stoljar, Groups and Entities: An Inquiry into Legal Theory (ANU Press, 1973) 183ff; Susan Watson, The Making of the Modern Company (Hart Publishing, 2022) 212-21. Z Eric W Orts, Business Persons: A Legal Theory of the Firm (Oxford University Press, 2013) 13. 8 Nicholson v Permakraft (NZ) Ltd (in liq) [1985] 1 NZLR 242, 250.

25 Padfield, ‘Rehabilitating Concession Theory’ (2014) 66(2) Oklahoma Law Review 327, 334 citing argument in First National Bank of Boston v Bellotti, 434 US 765, 778 n 14 (1978). 1° Salomon v Salomon & Co Ltd [1897] AC 22. 11 Ibid 29, 33-4.

12 5 Padfield, ‘Rehabilitating Concession Theory’ (2014) 66 Oklahoma Law Review 327, 329. 13 Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia v Queensland Rail (2015) 256 CLR 171 [53]. 14D Bonham and D Soberman, ‘The Nature of Corporate Personality’ in JS Ziegel (ed), Studies in Canadian Company Law (Butterworths, 1967) 5. 15 See D Bonham and D Soberman, ‘The Nature of Corporate Personality’ in JS Ziegel (ed), Studies in Canadian Company Law (Butterworths, 1967) 5; cf R Romano, ‘Metapolitics and Corporate Law Reform’ (1984) 36(4) Stanford Law Review 923, 933 (noting that concession theory could plausibly support arguments for limited state regulation). 16 M Stokes, ‘Company Law and Legal Theory’ in W Twining (ed), Legal Theory and Common Law (Blackwell, 1986) 162; M Horwitz, ‘Santa Clara Revisited: The Development of Corporate Theory’ (1985) 88(2) West Virginia Law Review 173, 186. 42 [1874-80] All ER Rep Ext 2219, 2230. 18 Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General (1990) 170 CLR 146.

12 Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd (1993) 178 CLR 477. 20 Ibid 553, 555. See also Murphy J’s judgment in Pyneboard Pty Ltd v Trade Practices Commission (1983) 152 CLR 328. 21 Hale v Henkel, 201 US 43 (1906), cited in Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd (1993) 178 CLR 477, 491. 22 See, eg, S Padfield, ‘Corporate Social Responsibility and Concession Theory’ (2015) 6 William & Mary Business Law Review 1; J Parkinson, Corporate Power and Responsib Issues in the Theory of Company Law (Clarendon Press, 1994) 22-3; K Greenfield, ‘From Rights to Regulation in Corporate Law’ in F MacMillan Patfield (ed), Perspectives on Company Law 2 (Kluwer, 1997) 1. 23 See Chapter 1.

24 See R Hessen, In Defense of the Corporation (Stanford University Press, 1979). 25 Some commentators doubt this is possible. See, eg, Katharina Pistor, The Code of Capital: How the Law Creates Wealth and Inequality (Princeton University Press, 2019) 55. 26 See Susan Watson, ‘The Corporate Legal Person’ (2015) 19(1) Journal of Corporate Law Studies 137, 166. 21 Eric Orts, Business Persons: A Legal Theory of the Firm (Oxford University Press, 2013) 21. 28 Ibid.

29 Susanna K Ripken, ‘Corporations Are People Too: A Multi-Dimensional Approach to the Corporate Personhood Puzzle’ (2009) 15(1) Fordham Journal of Corporate & Financial Law 97,110. 30 Automatic Self-Cleansing Filter Syndicate Co Ltd v Cuninghame [1906] 2 Ch 34. 31 See Chapter 1 at Section 1.30.10.

32 Ashbury Railway Carriage & Iron Co v Riche [1874-80] All ER Rep Ext 2219, 2225 (Cairns LC).
