# Chapter 5 The internal rules of a company

5.05 Introduction 5.10 An overview of the internal management of a company 5.15 Objects clauses and ultra vires 5.20 The corporate constitution 5.25 The replaceable rules 5.30 Internal rules for one director/shareholder companies 5.35 The statutory contract

## 5.35.05 The effect of the statutory contract
5.40 Remedies for breach of the statutory contract

## 5.40.05 Seeking a declaration or i

## 5.40.10 Rectification and damages

## 5.40.15 Additional members’ remedies under a shareholders’ agreement

## 5.40.20 Additional members’ remedies under statute 5.45 Interpretation of provisions in the statutory contract 5.50 Altering the constitution

## 5.50.05 Restrictions on the majority’s power to alter the constitution

## 5.50.10 The decision in Gambotto’s Case

## 5.50.15 Onus of proof
## 5.50.20 The reaction to Gambotto’s Case

## 5.50.25 When do the tests established in Gambotto’s Case not apply?

## 5.50.30 Reform of the compulsory acquisition provisions
5.55 Protection of class rights 5.60 Summary

Companies come into existence through registration. As discussed in Chapter 4, for a company to be registered it must have a constitution and/or have adopted all or some of the replaceable rules set out in the Corporations Act. The constitution and/or replaceable rules establish the internal rules that govern how the company operates. This chapter discusses the importance of these rules, whom they bind, and how they can be amended. It also discusses the rules that apply when there is a variation of the rights attaching to shares. Companies act through people—namely, their directors, officers or members—and there need to be rules to govern how the internal processes of the company operate. These rules govern a wide range of issues including how shares will be allocated, the rights attaching to shares, the rights and responsibility of members and directors, and how meetings will be held. Historically, it was necessary for the persons setting up a company to adopt a Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association to deal with such issues. The Memorandum of Association contained basic information about the company such as: its name; the amount of its share capital; the number of shares issued; that the liability of members was limited; and the names, addresses, occupation and number of shares taken by each member. It also contained an objects clause, which stated the purpose of the company. The Articles of Association contained the company’s internal rules. These rules governed: how members’ and directors’ meetings were held; how directors were appointed and removed; and how the company would be wound up. The companies legislation at the time included a set of model Articles of Association in Table A annexed to the statute.

In 1998, the requirement for a Memorandum and Articles of Association was removed, and companies must now have a corporate constitution and/or to adopt some or all of the replaceable rules in the Corporations Act. The replaceable rules will automatically apply if the company does not adopt its own constitution or use a combination of replaceable rules and a constitution. Companies formed before 1998 that still have Memorandum and Articles are treated as if those documents comprise the company’s constitution.1 In the following discussion, all references to the corporate constitution include a reference to the Memorandum and Articles of Association.

Prior to 1984, a company needed to include in the Memorandum of Association a statement of the company’s objects or purpose. Companies were only allowed to carry on the type of business for which they were incorporated, and any action beyond that purpose was invalid. For example, a company established to carry on an interior design business might have provided in its Memorandum that the purpose of the company was: to carry on in Australia the business of manufacturing, developing, fabricating, finishing and acting as importer, exporter, buyer, seller of interior design items, fabrics or furniture; and to carry on either alone or jointly the business of interior design, interior decorating and consulting and advising on interior design, and to do all incidental things necessary for the attainment of the above objects. The effect of an objects clause was that acts done by the company outside of the stated purpose were ultra vires and void. Not surprisingly, this doctrine created significant problems for third parties dealing with companies as they would be presumed to have read the Memorandum to ascertain what the full powers of the company were. This position was changed in 1984 and today all companies are given the powers of a natural person under s 124 of the Corporations Act. Only no-liability companies are still required to include an objects clause in their constitution restricting the company’s activities to mining (see s 112(2)). Whilst some not-for-profit and charitable companies choose to include an objects clause in their constitution, most commercial companies incorporated today do not. Further confirming that the doctrine of ultra vires no longer applies to companies, s 125(2) of the Corporations Act provides that an act of a company is not invalid merely because it is contrary to or beyond any objects or purpose stated in the company’s constitution. The effect of this provision is to ensure that third parties dealing with a company are protected if there is a limitation on the purpose or power of a company contained in the constitution. However, any directors that authorise an act beyond a company’s purpose may be liable for breach of directors’ duties, and a member may take an action for oppression or winding up the company on just and equitable grounds. These types of actions are discussed in Chapters 11 and 14. Under s 134 of the Corporations Act, a company’s internal management may be governed by the replaceable rules set out in the Act, by a constitution, or by a combination of both. The persons setting up a company can adopt a constitution either on registration—if each person named as a member agrees in writing to the terms of a constitution—or after registration, if the members pass a special resolution in the general meeting adopting the constitution. If a constitution is adopted, it needs to be lodged with ASIC. By allowing companies to write their own constitution, the law recognises the private nature of corporate arrangements. Persons setting up a company can choose the rules that will govern them. In large public companies, this choice is limited as shareholders are bound by the constitution in operation at the time they purchase shares. In smaller companies, new members are also bound by any existing constitution, but may be able to propose changes to it in general meeting. () Loading. Please wait

As discussed in Chapter 4, a proprietary company must have at least one shareholder and one director, who can be the same people. Section 135 of the Corporations Act provides that the replaceable rules do not apply to a one-person proprietary company. Instead, ss 198E, 201F, 202C and 249B contain provisions that govern the internal workings of these companies. For example, s 198E(1) provides that a single director may exercise all of the powers of the company except any powers that the Corporations Act or the company’s constitution (if any) requires the company to exercise in the general meeting. Section 249B provides that a company that has only one member may pass a resolution in circumstances where the member records the resolution in writing and signs it. The resolution must also be recorded in the company’s minute book: s 251A. These provisions are not replaceable rules and apply regardless of anything in a company’s constitution to the contrary. Acompany’s constitution and any replaceable rules operate as a unique type of contract called a statutory contract. Section 140(1) of the Corporations Act provides that the constitution and any replaceable rules have the effect of a contract between: (1) the company and each member; (2) the company and each director and secretary; and (3) between each member and each other member.

This creates a different form of contract to what we normally encounter in contract law. For example, new members in a company are bound by and have rights under the constitution and/or any replaceable rules as soon as their shares are issued or transferred, and their names included in the members register. Members’ express consent to these rules is not necessary for them to be bound. Similarly, any directors and/or secretaries appointed by the company become subject to the constitution and/or any replaceable rules when they are appointed to that role, regardless of whether they are aware of the rules or not. Another difference between the statutory contract and a normal contract is how it can be varied. If a company has a constitution, it can only be added to or varied by special resolution of the members in the general meeting.‘ A special resolution requires the consent of 75 per cent of members present and voting at the meeting (ss 9, 250MA). For normal contracts to be varied, all parties must agree to the variation. The right of members to vary the constitution by special resolution is subject to several legal constraints, including the equitable rules on majority powers and the statutory rules on the variation of class rights (both discussed below). Where a company has adopted some or all of the replaceable rules, these rules operate as terms of the statutory contract between the company and each member, the company and each director and secretary, and between a member and each other member. As these rules exist as sections of the Corporations Act, they can only be varied by Parliament. The replaceable rules are unlikely to suit every company. The persons setting up a company need to carefully consider the rules they adopt and whether any additional provisions are necessary. For example, if the members want particular rules to govern how disputes will be resolved (such as, using arbitration or mediation before litigation) or what will happen if the company is wound up, these rules need to be included in the constitution. Certain companies cannot use the replaceable rules. These include public companies limited by guarantee that have omitted the word ‘Limited’ from their name (s 150), no liability public companies (s 112), and companies listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX).2 These companies must have their own constitution.

## 5.35.05 The effect of the statutory contract

As the constitution and/or any replaceable rules operate as a statutory contract between the key participants in a company, these parties gain both rights and obligations under them. As indicated above, s 140(1) provides that a statutory contract exists between the company and each member; the company and each director and company secretary; and a member and each other member. The effect of s 140 is not to give these parties a right to enforce every provision of the constitution or replaceable rules. Instead, s 140 confers rights and obligations on each party in their particular corporate capacity. In other words, a member has the right to enforce provisions relevant to them as a member; a director has the right to enforce provisions relevant to them as a director; and members can enforce relevant provisions against other members.£ As the Court noted in Smolarek v Liwszyc:2 It is accordingly plain from [section 140], that it imposes a duty upon each of the parties to that deemed contract to comply with the replaceable rules so far as they apply to that person ... Of course, a provision of the statutory contract cannot be enforced unless it affects the member in his or her capacity as a member ... If the act or omission complained of is a wrong to the company alone, the members’ standing to sue becomes doubtful. To explain this further, once a person becomes a member of a company, they are bound by and gain rights under the provisions of the company’s constitution and/or replaceable rules that are relevant to them as a member. This means they can only enforce those provisions or rules that deal with matters perTo explain this further, once a person becomes a member of a company, they are bound by and gain rights under the provisions of the company’s constitution and/or replaceable rules that are relevant to them as a member. This means they can only enforce those provisions or rules that deal with matters personal to them in that capacity (see Eley v Positive Government Security Life Assurance Co Ltd,? discussed below). For example, provisions dealing with how general meetings will be held, how voting rights can be exercised, or how dividends will be declared confer membership rights that can be enforced by any member against the company. In the same way, a provision stipulating that if members want to sell their shares, they must first offer them to other members (called a ‘right of pre-emption’) can be enforced between members.!2 A similar provision exists for proprietary companies in the replaceable rule in s 254D, which gives pre-emptive rights to existing shareholders when new shares are issued. Finally, members have a personal right to ensure the appointment and removal of directors is done in accordance with any relevant provisions contained in the constitution! Directors often enter a separate contract of service with a company through which they gain additional rights and obligations over and above those that apply via the constitution or replaceable rules. These contracts cannot override provisions in the corporate constitution; rather, they exist alongside them. For example, if the constitution provides for the appointment of a director for a specified period, this provision will be enforceable in contract despite anything different that may be contained in the contract for service. However, as provisions in the constitution can be altered by special resolution of the members in general meeting, the rules relevant to directors can be changed without their consent. In Shuttleworth v Cox Brothers & Co (Maidenhead) Ltd,2 the Court held the constitution could be amended to provide that a director could be removed on the written request of all the other directors. The directors signed such a request and the director, who was appointed for life under the constitution, was removed. The Court rejected the argument that the statutory contract could only be altered with the director's consent and found that the removal was valid. The list of contractual relationships set out in s 140 is exhaustive and other relationships between participants in a company—such as between a director and a member—are not governed in contract by provisions of the constitution. Similarly, there is no contractual relationship created under s 140 between the company, a director or member, and a third party. Any provision in the constitution that seeks to create rights or impose obligations on a third party is not enforceable in contract.2 This was stated by the Court in Hickman v Kent or Romney Marsh Sheepbreeders’ Association as follows: [A]n outsider to whom rights purport to be given by the articles in his [sic] capacity as an outsider, whether he is or subsequently becomes a member, cannot sue on those articles.4 This situation was demonstrated in Eley v Positive Government Security Life Assurance Co Ltd (‘Eley’s Case’)12 Here, one party, Mr Baylis, approached Mr Eley (a solicitor) requesting his assistance in setting up a company. Eley agreed to contribute money to the company on the basis that he would be employed as the company’s solicitor. A provision confirming Eley’s appointment was included in the Articles of Association. After a number of years, the company changed its solicitors. Eley sought to enforce the provision appointing him as the company’s solicitor under the predecessor of s 140. The Court rejected his claim on the basis that a statutory contract only exists between the parties listed in the section, and as such Eley had no contractual right to enforce the provision under the Articles. This was the case even though Eley owned shares in the company, as the provision in question related to an issue that was separate from his rights as a member.£ Under s 140(2) of the Corporations Act, any change to the constitution made after a person becomes a member that requires them to take up additional shares, increases their liability to the company, or imposes restrictions on their rights to transfer shares is not binding unless that person agrees to the change in writing. A contravention of a replaceable rule is not a breach of the Corporations Act (s 135(3)). While the replaceable rules appear in the legislation, they are only binding on the parties listed in s 140 in contract law and do not attract statutory remedies under the Act.
## 5.40.05 Seeking a declaration or injunction

The most common remedies sought for breach of the constitution or the replaceable rules are an injunction to restrain the breach and/or a declaration as to the validity of any action. A member, director or secretary commencing an action for breach of the statutory contract must first show that the breach adversely affects them in their specific capacity as a member, director or secretary. Once this is established, they may seek a declaration or injunction under the common law requiring the other party (usually the company) to comply with or refrain from breaching the terms of the statutory contract. These remedies are discretionary and are not granted unless some important interest needs protecting.2 It is key to remember that the Corporations Act provisions dealing with breach of that Act and providing for consequences on breach (such as s 1324 that deals with statutory injunctions) do not apply to breaches of the constitution or replaceable rules. Examples of declarations that members have sought under the ordinary jurisdiction of the court include: that a meeting is invalid if the requirement for a quorum is not met! that a meeting is invalid if the required notice under the company’s constitution is not given!2 that a meeting is invalid if there is no chairperson appointed as required by the company’s constitution22 that a share transfer done without compliance with the pre-emption provisions contained in the company’s constitution is voidable and entitles a member to have the register of members rectified2! that a variation of class rights done without complying with a constitutional provision requiring consent from the party affected results in the variation being invalid.22 The provisions of the constitution are enforced strictly. In the case of Inspector James v Ryan (No 3), the Full Bench of the Industrial Court of New South Wales had to determine if an appointment of a director was invalid where the provisions of the company’s constitution were not observed. Clause 3.2 of Dekorform Pty Ltd’s constitution provided that its parent company, Alesco Corporation Limited, could appoint a person to be a director by notice to Dekorform. Clause 13.6 provided that Alesco could exercise a power by notice in writing executed by the company, or on behalf of the company by a director, secretary or executive officer of Alesco. The notice needed to be delivered or sent by facsimile or other electronic means to Dekorform. Under the constitution, the replaceable rules were expressly displaced by clause 13.5. The case involved charges under s 8(1) of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000 (NSW) (‘OHS Act’). This section imposed a duty on employers to ensure the health, safety and welfare of its employees. In July 2006, an employee of Dekorform was fatally injured in the course of their employment. Under s 26 of the OHS Act, ‘if a company contravenes any provision of the Act, each director of a company is also taken to have contravened the Act (subject to limited defences): It was alleged that Ryan was liable as a director of Dekorform under the OHS Act. However, one of the key issues was whether Ryan was validly appointed as a director, as Alesco had not given written notice to Dekorform of his appointment. Adopting a strict interpretation of the provisions in the company’s constitution, Marks J, at first instance, found that Ryan was not a director of Dekorform.”4 Alesco had failed to deliver notice of Ryan's appointment to Dekorform and therefore Ryan had not been appointed by valid means. The effect of this finding was that Ryan was not personally liable for the company’s offences under the OHS Act. The Full Bench of the Industrial Court of New South Wales agreed with Marks J's conclusion. It noted that clause 13.5 excluded the operation of the replaceable rules and therefore the giving of notice in accordance with clause 13.6 was ‘the only means under Dekorform’s constitution by which [a director's] appointment could be made’25 It considered that the appointment of a director is a fundamental exercise of power within a corporation and any provisions in the constitution dealing with the matter had to be complied with if the appointment was to be valid. The Full Bench came to this conclusion notwithstanding the fact that Ryan and all the other directors in both Dekorform and Alesco believed Ryan was a director and that he was named in the daciiments filed with ASIC The Court found that ‘it cannot he riaht that a nractice relatina ta the imnortant function of The Full Bench came to this conclusion notwithstanding the fact that Ryan and all the other directors in both Dekorform and Alesco believed Ryan was a director and that he was named in the documents filed with ASIC. The Court found that ‘it cannot be right that a practice relating to the important function of appointing directors developed inconsistently with the company’s constitution could supplant the requirements of the constitution’ It also rejected the argument that Ryan was a de facto director, as defined in s 9 of the Corporations Act. This was on the basis that Ryan had not acted in the position on an ongoing basis (his involvement was confined to the signing of three documents: a circulating resolution of directors, a power of attorney and a deed of cross guarantee) and he was not performing top-level management functions at Dekorform.22

## 5.40.10 Rectification and damages

The contractual remedy of rectification is not available if there has been a mistake in the wording of the corporate constitution, or the wording does not represent the actual intentions of the members.2£ If a provision in the constitution is inaccurate, the appropriate remedy is for the members to pass a special resolution altering the constitution under s 136(2). The limitation on the availability of rectification as a remedy is due to the special nature of the statutory contract, and the problem of determining the actual intention (or the consensus ad idem) of the members. This is because the consent of only 75 per cent of the members needs to be given to alter the constitution.22 As Hodgson J notes, it is also due to the nature of the constitution:

## 5.40.10 Rectification and damages

In my view, it is clear that the remedy of rectification is not confined to documents which are strictly contractual documents ... [Rlectification can be applied to such documents as conveyances of land, settlements, policies of life insurance, disentailing deeds, bills of exchange and leases. However, even if these documents are not strictly contractual documents, they do appear to have the function of giving effect to private agreements or intentions. Although some of such documents, such as conveyances or transfers of land, are placed upon a public register, this is essentially to inform interested persons of private transactions between the parties to the document ... ‘The original articles of association of a company do, in one sense, give effect to private agreements or intentions of the corporators. However, registration of the articles is required, so that persons dealing with the company can ascertain what are the provisions regulating the affairs of the company. Furthermore, the statutory contract established by the Companies legislation is a contract binding the company, which was not a party to the original agreements or intentions. In those circumstances, it seems that as a matter of principle, a distinction can be drawn between articles of association and the kinds of documents in relation to which the remedy of rectification is granted 22 There is ongoing debate on whether the remedy of damages should be available for breach of the statutory contract. Traditionally, damages have not been available where a claim is brought by a member against a company for breach of the statutory contract. However, in McLaughlin v Dungowan Manly Pty Ltd,32 the Supreme Court of New South Wales granted damages to the holders of shares in a home unit company which was redeveloped in a way that constituted a variation of their class rights, a topic which is discussed below. On appeal to the New South Wales Court of Appeal, Bathurst CJ noted that ‘(t)here is some doubt as to whether the statutory contract formed by section 140 of the Act gives rise to a claim for damages for breach’22 Members in a company may enter into a shareholders’ agreement, giving them additional rights in contract against each other. A shareholders’ agreement is a contract between some or all of the company’s members. The agreement will generally deal with issues specific to their investment that are not covered in the constitution. The benefits of a shareholders’ agreement are that it can be created any time after incorporation, it can deal with issues particular to the members in question, and it is private as it does not need to be lodged with ASIC. Shareholders’ agreements often contain provisions dealing with issues such as transfers of shares between members, share buy outs, dividend payments, dispute resolution, additional contribution of funds, confidentiality In my view, it is clear that the remedy of rectification is not confined to documents which are strictly contractual documents ... [Rectification can be and restraint of trade (or non-compete clauses). Neither the company’s constitution nor the provisions of the Corporations Act can be overridden by a shareholders’ agreement, although such agreements may supplement and clarify the parties’ rights.24 The situation may also be less clear where all shareholders are party to an agreement that seeks to vary constitutional rights. As discussed in Chapter 14, members have a number of other remedies available to them under the Corporations Act that can prevent or compel actions by directors or a majority of shareholders. These include: an action under s 232 in relation to oppressive conduct an order under s 461 to have the company wound up where it is just and equitable to do so or where the directors have acted in their own interest an order seeking to prevent a variation of the rights attached to shares where the procedure (if any) set out in the company’s constitution is not followed or, where there is not such procedure, the requirements set out in ss 246B-G are not followed. There are conceptual challenges involved in characterising the constitution and/or replaceable rules as a contract. Despite this, Australian courts apply the ordinary principles for interpreting and enforcing contracts when determining the meaning of these provisions. This means that the provisions of the constitution and the replaceable rules are interpreted as if they form part of a commercial contract. The leading case confirming this approach is Lion Nathan Australia Pty Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd2® This case involved a hostile takeover bid by Lion Nathan Ltd, Australia’s second largest brewer, of Coopers Brewery Limited in 2005. One of the key issues was the interpretation of key provisions in Coopers’ Articles of Association. The Articles had originally been prepared in the 1920s, when Coopers was converted from a family partnership to a company limited by shares. The Articles had been altered several times since then. In 2003, Coopers had bought back shares in the company from its shareholders. This was a share buy-back scheme in accordance with div 2 pt 2J.1 of the Corporations Act. Lion Nathan owned a type of shares in the company that granted it pre-emptive rights (meaning a first right of refusal) over shares in Coopers. These rights were set out in the Articles of Association of Coopers. In 2005, Lion Nathan issued proceedings against Coopers arguing that Lion Nathan should have been offered the right to purchase any of the shares bought back by Coopers. To resolve this issue, the Court had to determine whether the article giving pre-emptive rights to Lion Nathan applied to a share buy-back. Finn J of the Federal Court, at first instance, held that the expression ‘any transfer of shares’ in the Articles of Association did not encompass a share buy-back. This meant that Lion Nathan's pre-emptive right did not apply where a buy-back was involved. Finn J had regard to Coopers’ previous Articles of Association in determining the underlying purpose of the pre-emptive rights scheme. On appeal, the Full Court of the Federal Court held that Finn J was justified in considering extrinsic materials when interpreting the pre-emptive rights scheme in the Articles of Association. The Court noted that: a company constitution is similar to a commercial contract, and should be construed to promote business efficacy company constitutions, like other commercial documents, must be read as a whole the constitution should be interpreted in light of the broader commercial context in which it is created extrinsic evidence may be used to assist in interpreting the constitution the principles applicable to the implication of terms into contracts apply to constitutions, although courts have been slow to imply terms into constitutions. In 2014, the members of Coopers changed the company’s constitution to make it harder for any other hostile takeover bid to be made. The amendment changed the way shares would be priced in the context of a takeover bid as opposed to when existing members buy shares off each other. According to a newspaper report: [I]t is reported that at a closed-door meeting of [Coopers'] tight-knit 143 shareholders, held at the Coopers’ brewery in Adelaide, a tiny amendment was made to its constitution, which governs the way fair value of Coopers’ shares is calculated ... The Coopers constitution ... has been strengthened even more to what is referred to inside the Adelaide brewer as ‘belt and braces’ protection that should keep it independent.** As indicated above, under s 136(2) of the Corporations Act, a corporate constitution can only be altered if the members pass a special resolution approving the alteration. There may be additional requirements stated in a company’s constitution that must be complied with before an alteration is passed—such as unanimous consent of all members to any alteration—but a constitution cannot be made unalterable (s 136(3)). Where the constitution of a public company is amended, notice must be given to ASIC of the change (s 136(5)). While s 136(2) of the Corporations Act clearly allows an alteration to the corporate constitution via a special resolution of members passed at a general meeting, this power is subject to certain restrictions. These restrictions exist because, in making such a decision, the majority of members are acting as one of the two organs of the company, the other being the board of directors.2Z As a result, the majority members’ power to vote on an alteration to the constitution must be exercised in good faith and for a proper purpose. As the High Court noted in Ngurli Ltd vMcCann38 Shareholders ... as individuals in general meeting can usually exercise their votes for their own benefit. But there is a limit even in general meetings to the extent to which the majority may exercise their votes for their own benefit ... It must be exercised, not only in the manner required by law, but also bona fide for the benefit of the company as a whole.*2 To understand this limitation, it is necessary to appreciate what is meant by a ‘majority’ and a‘minority’ of members. A majority of members will be able to control the decisions of a company in general meeting. How votes are cast in members’ meetings is discussed further in Chapter 7. Voting can be on a show of hands or a poll can be requested so that members vote based on the number of shares they hold. In a small company, there may be one or two shareholders who together own enough shares to pass a general resolution and/or a special resolution. In this case, these members are generally called a majority. Ina large public company, there will often be many shareholders who own small numbers of shares; a majority will exist where one or more shareholders hold as little as 20 per cent of the issued shares. This is because the members owning small parcels of shares may not attend general meetings and, even if they do, may not be able to assemble themselves together to block or pass an ordinary or special resolution. In this instance, even though these shareholders might own over 50 per cent of the shares in the company, they are still defined as minority shareholders if individually their shareholdings are small. Determining which members control the general meeting is important. There are limits on what a majority of members can do in general meeting, particularly in the context of altering the corporate constitution. Until 1995, when the case of Gambotto v WCP Ltd42 ('Gambotto’s Case’) was decided, the position in Australia was that the majority members’ power to alter the constitution had to be exercised bona fide in the interests of the company as a whole4t As Lindley MR stated in Allen v Gold Reefs of West Africa Ltd:

‘The power [to amend the constitution] must ... be exercised subject to those general principles of law and equity which are applicable to all powers conferred on majorities and enabling them to bind minorities. It must be exercised, not only in the manner required by law, but also bona fide for the benefit of the company as a whole, and it must not be exceeded.“ This test was based on an equitable principle known as ‘fraud on the minority’ that required that any powers that could be exercised by a majority of shareholders in the general meeting had to be exercised for a proper purpose.*? Failure by the majority to exercise a power for a proper purpose could result in equitable remedies being available to minority members, including rescission of a contract, an injunction, or an account of profits. The onus of proof in establishing an improper purpose lay with the minority shareholders. However, this situation changed after Gambotto’s Case, which is examined in detail later in this chapter. The Allen test was discussed in Peters’ American Delicacy Co Ltd v Heath,“ where the High Court noted the challenges involved in determining what is in the best interests of the company as a whole where members have differing interests. In this case, the Articles of Association contained conflicting provisions on how dividends and bonus shares would be distributed. One set of Articles stated that dividends would be paid to members in proportion to the amount paid up on their shares.42 This meant members with fully paid shares would receive more bonus shares than members with partly paid shares. However, another Article provided that bonus shares would be distributed on the basis of how many shares a member owned. A majority of shareholders in general meeting passed a special resolution to alter the later Article, so that bonus shares would be issued on the basis of the amount paid up on shares. The holders of partly paid shares opposed this resolution and sought a declaration that the alteration was invalid as it only benefitted the fully paid shareholders not the company

## 5.50.10 The decision in Gambotto’s Case

The Allen test came under review in Gambotto v WCP Ltd.*? In this case, the majority members of WCP Ltd wanted to expropriate (or acquire) the shares of the minority shareholders. The majority shareholders, who owned 99.7 per cent of the shares in WCP, were subsidiaries of a major corporate entity, Industrial Equity Group. The remaining 0.3 per cent of the shares were held by 71 individual shareholders, including Mr Gambotto and Ms Sandri. A shareholders’ meeting was convened to consider adding a new article that would allow a majority shareholder with 90 per cent of the issued shares in WCP to acquire all the remaining shares in the company. The price offered for the shares ($1.80 per share) was higher than an accountant's valuation of the shares ($1.365 per share). The effect of this change would be that WCP became a wholly owned subsidiary of Industrial Equity, and this would enable certain taxation and accounting advantages to be claimed by WCP. Gambotto and Sandri instituted proceedings prior to the meeting being held to prevent the resolution being passed. They also did not attend the meeting. However, the special resolution was passed by three of the remaining minority shareholders, with the majority shareholders not voting on the resolution. At first instance, McLelland J in the New South Wales Supreme Court held that an amendment that permits minority shares to be expropriated by majority shareholders is an unjust oppression of the dissenting minority shareholders.*2 The New South Wales Court of Appeal reversed this decision, finding in favour of the majority shareholders on the basis that expropriating the minority’s shares was not of itself oppressive, and on the facts there were considerable financial benefits for WCP if the expropriation was permitted.>! The High Court rejected this conclusion and overturned the Court of Appeal's decision on the basis that the amendment was not done for a proper purpose. It held that the test set out in Allen’s case was not appropriate where there was a conflict of interests between the shareholders, and proposed a new test for assessing the validity of changes to the constitution in this context. The language used by the Court in proposing this new test is important to understanding how and when it applies. An extended quote from the majority judgment of Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ is provided below: [T]he courts have struggled to strike a balance between the interests of the majority and the minority. On the one hand, the courts have recognised that the proprietary rights attaching to shares are subject to modification, even destruction, by a special resolution altering the articles and that the power to vote is exercisable by a shareholder to his or her own advantage. On the other hand, the courts have acknowledged that the power to alter the articles should not be exercised simply for the purpose of securing some personal gain which does not arise out of the contemplated objects of the power ... In the context of a special resolution altering the articles and giving rise to a conflict of interests and advantages, whether or not it involves an expropriation of shares, we would reject as inappropriate the ‘bona fide for the benefit of the company as a whole test of Lindley MR in Allen v Gold Reefs of West Africa Ltd ... It seems to us that, in such a case not involving an actual or effective expropriation of shares or of valuable proprietary rights attaching to shares, an alteration of the articles by special resolution regularly passed will be valid unless it is ultra vires, beyond any purpose contemplated by the articles or oppressive as that expression is understood in the law relating to corporations. Somewhat different considerations apply, however, in a case such as the present where what is involved is an alteration of the articles to allow an expropriation by the majority of the shares, or of valuable proprietary rights attaching to the shares, of a minority. In such a case, the immediate purpose of the resolution is to confer upon the majority shareholder or shareholders power to acquire compulsorily the property of a minority shareholder or shareholders ... Such a power could not be taken or exercised simply for the purpose of aggrandizing the majority. In our view, such a power can be taken only if (i) it is exercisable for a proper purpose and (ii) its exercise will not operate oppressively in relation to minority shareholders. In other words, an expropriation may be justified where it is reasonably apprehended that the continued shareholding of the minority is detrimental to the company, its undertaking or the conduct of its affairs - resulting in detriment to the interests of the existing shareholders generally - and expropriation is a reasonable means of eliminating or mitigating that detriment. Accordingly, if it appears that the substantial purpose of the alteration is to secure the company from significant detriment or harm, the alteration would be valid if it is not oppressive to the minority shareholders. So, expropriation would be justified in the case of the shareholder who is competing with the company ... [or] if it were necessary in order to ensure that the company could continue to comply with the regulatory regime governing the principle business which it carries on .... Notwithstanding that a shareholder's membership of a company is subject to alterations of the articles which may affect the rights attaching to the shareholder's shares and the value of those shares, we do not consider that, in the case of an alteration to the articles authorising the expropriation of shares, it is a sufficient justification of an expropriation that the expropriation, being fair, will advance the interests of the company as a legal and commercial entity or those of the majority ... of corporators. This approach does not attach Notwithstanding that a shareholder's membership of a company is subject to alterations of the articles which may affect the rights attaching to the shareholder's shares and the value of those shares, we do not consider that, in the case of an alteration to the articles authorising the expropriation of shares, it is a sufficient justification of an expropriation that the expropriation, being fair, will advance the interests of the company as a legal and commercial entity or those of the majority ... of corporators. This approach does not attach sufficient weight to the proprietary nature of a share ... It is only right that exceptional circumstances should be required to justify an amendment to the articles authorizing the compulsory expropriation by the majority of the minority’s interest in a company. To allow expropriation where it would advance the interests of the company as a legal and commercial entity or those of the general body of corporators would, in our view, be tantamount to permitting expropriation by the majority for the purpose of some personal gain and thus be made for an improper purpose ... As noted in the preceding paragraphs, an alteration to the company’s articles permitting the expropriation of shares ... must also be fair in the circumstances. Fairness in this context has both procedural and substantive elements. The first element, that the process used to expropriate must be fair, requires the majority shareholders to disclose all relevant information leading up to the alteration and it presumably requires the shares to be valued by an independent expert. Whether it also requires the majority shareholders to refrain from voting on the proposed amendment is a question that is best left open at this stage. ‘The second element, that the terms of the expropriation itself must be fair, is largely concerned with the price offered for the shares. ‘Thus, an expropriation at less than market value is prime facie unfair, and it would be unusual for a court to be satisfied that a price substantially above market value was not a fair value ... It is for the majority to prove that the alteration is valid because it was made for a proper purpose and is fair in all the circumstances. In making its decision, the High Court sought to strike a balance between the interests of the majority and minority shareholders. A key issue for the Court when balancing these interests was the proprietary nature of shares. A share is personal property, as are the rights attaching to shares. As the High Court stated, a share ‘is more than a “capitalized dividend stream’: it is a form of investment that confers proprietary rights on the investor’=4 By giving themselves the right to acquire the minority members’ shares, the majority were taking away the minority’s property and the Court considered this could only be done where due regard was had to the legitimate proprietary interests of the minority. Competing with this position was the established principle that a majority of members in general meeting have power to pass a special resolution, provided the resolution is in the best interests of the company.** On the face of it, this resolution complied with that rule. Tha Ca PAR

The Court distinguished between two situations: where there is an alteration to the constitution that involves an expropriation of shares or the valuable rights attached to shares; and where the alteration does not involve such expropriation. These two situations are discussed separately below. The test to be applied where an alteration involves a conflict of members’ interests and an expropriation of shares or the valuable rights attaching to shares The majority judgment held that a different test applies to alterations of the constitution that involve the expropriation of shares or the valuable proprietary rights attached to shares. Where an alteration seeks to take away shares or property rights attached to shares, a two-stage test applies: (1) Was the exercise of the power done for a proper purpose? (2) Was it fair in all the circumstances?

First, as indicated in the extract from the High Court majority judgment above, an alteration that seeks to expropriate members’ shares or the rights attaching to shares must be for a proper purpose; it must be necessary to prevent the company from suffering significant detriment or harm. Examples of such alterations given by the High Court include where an expropriation involves removing a shareholder that is competing with the company,=° or where it is necessary to meet legislative requirements (such as laws requiring 100 per cent ownership for a television licence).>2 As these examples indicate, the test for a proper purpose is strict and the circumstances where it will be met are rare. The majority judgment made it clear that an expropriation to secure tax, administrative or commercial advantages for the majority shareholders is not a proper purpose in relation to the expropriation of shares.=2 Second, the alteration must be fair in all the circumstances. Fairness in this context requires two elements: (1) The process for the expropriation must be fair. This requires that all relevant information surrounding the alteration must be provided to members and the shares must be valued by an independent expert; and (2) The price offered for the shares must be fair. This means that the price must at least be equal to the market price for the shares and must also take account of other relevant factors such as the assets of the company, any dividend payments, the nature of the company and its likely future activities. This two-part test was applied in Bundaberg Sugar Ltd v Isis Central Sugar Mill Co Ltd? In this case, the constitution of Bundaberg Sugar was altered (a number of years before legal action was taken) to provide that the shares of any member who ceased to be a sugar supplier to the company would be forfeited to the companv. The main ouroose for this provision was to ensure that Bundabera Suaar could retain its status as a co-onerative. which enabled it to claim consid- (2) Was it fair in all the circumstances?

This two-part test was applied in Bundaberg Sugar Ltd v Isis Central Sugar Mill Co Ltd? In this case, the constitution of Bundaberg Sugar was altered (a number of years before legal action was taken) to provide that the shares of any member who ceased to be a sugar supplier to the company would be forfeited to the company. The main purpose for this provision was to ensure that Bundaberg Sugar could retain its status as a co-operative, which enabled it to claim consid- erable taxation benefits. The Supreme Court of Queensland held that a forfeiture of shares under the provision was the same as an expropriation of shares. As a result, the Court considered whether there was a proper purpose for the expropriation by forfeiture of the members’ shares and concluded there was as it was detrimental to the company to lose its co-operative status: ‘The continued shareholding by persons who do not supply sugar to the defendant would be detrimental to the company and the conduct of its affairs (the loss of the valuable tax deductions) if it were to lose its co-operative status. It is reasonable for it to preserve that status by doing business only with its members. However, as compensation had not been paid to the members whose shares were forfeited, the action failed to satisfy the second limb of the test established in Gambotto’s case: that the expropriation was fair in all the circumstances. In Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd v Combined Auctions Pty Ltd," Young J held that an amendment to a company’s constitution providing that the company could sell the shares of any member who was not actively engaged in a pawnbroking business, or acting as a nominee of such a person, was invalid. In that case, the company, Combined Auctions Pty Ltd, had been established as an auction house for pawnbrokers. It claimed that it had adopted the provision due to the perceived threat of a takeover. However, Young J held that the amendment was invalid under the first test in Gambotto’s Case as it was not necessary to protect the company from harm. This was because at least one-third of the members of the company were not pawnbrokers at the time the provision was introduced and the amendment did not come into effect for five years, suggesting that the threat to the company was not immediate. While the High Court did not define what was meant by ‘valuable proprietary rights attaching to shares; in Shears v Phosphate Co-operative Co of Australia Ltd, an alteration that attempted to remove or restrict voting rights was held by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria to attract the Gambotto test. Yet, as discussed below, it is not always clear if the rights attaching to shares have been varied. For example, in the older decision of Greenhalgh v Arderne Cinemas Ltd, a company’s share capital was divided into 10-shilling and 2-shilling shares. After a disagreement, the company decided at a general meeting to subdivide the 10-shilling shares into 2-shilling shares. This had the effect of decreasing Greenhalgh’s voting power within the company. Greenhalgh argued it was an unauthorised variation of rights attaching to his shares. However, the Court held that the voting rights attaching to the shares had not been The test to be applied where an alteration involves a conflict of members’ interests but there is no expropriation of shares or the valuable rights attaching to shares The High Court has referred to situations where there is an alteration of the constitution giving rise to a conflict of interests and advantages between shareholders that does not involve an expropriation of shares or the rights attaching to shares. The Court considered that such an amendment would be valid unless it is‘ultra vires, beyond any purpose contemplated by the articles or oppressive as that expression is understood in the law relating to corporations’ The Court did not elaborate further on the test or when it would apply: Although the decision of the majority of the High Court can be expressed relatively simply, it becomes less straightforward if one attempts to fit previously decided cases within this framework. For example, the Peters’ American Delicacy case involved a resolution to alter the articles so that bonus shares would be distributed in proportion to the amount paid up on shares rather than in proportion to the number of shares held. The alteration therefore disadvantaged partly-paid shareholders. ‘The case clearly gave rise to a conflict of interests between majority and minority shareholders. But did it involve an expropriation of proprietary rights attaching to shares? If it did not, then the resolution would be valid provided it was not ultra vires, passed for an improper purpose or oppressive.

## 5.50.15 Onus of proof

One other important change made by the High Court in Gambotto’s Case was to clarify which party bears the onus of proof in cases involving an expropriation of shares or the valuable proprietary rights attaching to shares. Previously, alterations to the constitution were prima facie valid, and the onus of proof was on the minority to prove otherwise. In Gambotto’s Case, the Court held that it is for the majority, rather than the minority, to prove the validity of any alteration. This was based on the need to alleviate ‘the sting of practical difficulties, such as poor access to information, that would otherwise confront minority shareholders‘

## 5.50.20 The reaction to Gambotto’s Case

The High Court's decision in Gambotto’s Case provoked a lot of discussion and criticism.®2 There was concern that the High Court had gone too far in favour-

## 5.50.15 Onus of proof

## 5.50.20 The reaction to Gambotto’s Case

The High Court’s decision in Gambotto’s Case provoked a lot of discussion and criticism.®2 There was concern that the High Court had gone too far in favouring minority members’ rights.2° There was also concern that the decision imposed unnecessary burdens on corporate restructures and buy-outs involving the purchase of minority members’ shares, and that it could allow small shareholders to become obstructionist in their actions. Similarly, there was concern that the decision could be extended by subsequent court decisions. However, as Ramsay and Saunders noted in 2011 (16 years after the decision was handed down) whilst many subsequent judicial decisions were critical of Gambotto, none have sought to extend the principles to other situations.2" As a result, the tests established by the High Court relating to alterations to the corporate constitution are now largely confined to the factual situations expressly discussed in Gambotto. It is also interesting to note that the approach adopted by the High Court has not been adopted in the United Kingdom. There, the Privy Council has held that the appropriate test should be whether an alteration to the constitution provides a reasonable benefit to the company22 As was made clear by the High Court in Gambotto, there must be an alteration of the constitution giving rise to a conflict of interests and advantages for the tests in that case to apply. In other words, the alteration must apply differently (in words or effect) to some members than to others. If an alteration applies equally to all members, the test in Allen’s case will still apply and to be valid the alteration must be ‘bona fide for the benefit of the company as a whole’23 In Bundaberg Sugar, the Supreme Court of Queensland considered what it meant for a resolution to give rise to a conflict of interests and advantages. This was because the company argued that the resolution (providing that the shares of any member who ceased to be a sugar supplier to the company would be forfeited to the company) created ’a regime which treats all members of the company equally in the sense that any member who ceases to be a supplier of sugar to the mill is liable to have its shares forfeited’2* However, as the Court stated: ‘This is not a case where the articles affect all shareholders equally. They operate differentially, or allow the directors to act differentially, with respect to different classes of members: those who supply sugar and those who do not. The shares of members in the second class may be taken from them, compulsorily, and either destroyed by cancellation or sold or re-allotted to an existing member or members who will, by definition, be one of the majority class of shareholders; those who supply sugar2® teration. I nis was based on the need to alleviate ‘the sting of practical ditniculties, such as poor access to intormation, that would otherwise contront minority shareholders‘

## 5.50.20 The reaction to Gambotto’s Case

One other restriction on the application of Gambotto’s Case is that it only applies to alterations of the constitution after it has been adopted. It does not apply where the constitution registered on incorporation provides for the expropriation of a member's shares. If that exists, and the power is exercised reasonably, the provision in the constitution will prevail and a minority shareholder will not have a right to complain if their shares are expropriated in accordance with the provision.2&

## 5.50.30 Reform of the compulsory acquisition provisions

Parts 6A.1 and 6A.2 of the Corporations Act, dealing with compulsory acquisitions in the context of a corporate takeover, were amended after the decision in Gambotto’s Case. Under s 664A, any person who owns 90 per cent of the shares in a class or has 90 per cent of the voting power in a company may compulsorily acquire the remainder of the shares in the class. The power must, however, be exercised within six months of the member acquiring 90 per cent of the shares or voting rights. O Loading. Please wait

For various reasons, the directors or shareholders may want to alter the rights attaching to shares. Generally, ordinary shares carry the right to vote at general meetings, participate in the company’s profits via the payment of dividends, and receive any surplus profits on winding up. Class rights are discussed further at Section 8.15.10. As discussed above, where the rights attaching to shares are stated in the constitution, and an alteration to those rights involves an alteration to the constitution, the requirements of s 136 and Gambotto’s Case must be complied with. However, not all variations of the rights attaching to shares involve an alteration to the constitution. Only the rights attaching to some types or classes of shares (such as preference shares) need to be stated in the constitution, although it is common for a constitution to state whether shares with different rights can be issued.2 Sections 246B-246G of the Corporations Act set out the process to be followed if a variation to the rights attaching to shares is proposed. While these provisions apply to both companies limited by shares and by guarantee, we will discuss them by reference to the rights of shareholders. There are three questions to be answered before provisions dealing with how an alteration must be done apply: (1) Is the company’s share capital divided into classes? (2) Are the rights in question ‘class rights’? (3) Does the proposed change amount to a ‘variation or cancellation’ of those class rights? These questions address whether there has been an alteration of class rights.

In answering the first question, whether or not the company’s share capital is divided into classes, Australian courts have applied a commonsense approach. In Crumpton v Morrine Hall Pty Ltd, there was no express reference in the company’s constitution to different classes of shares. There was a provision that prescribed how class rights could be altered if the company did have classes of shares, and the question in that case was whether this procedure should be followed. Jacobs J addressed this issue quite simply. If shares of the company could be meaningfully differentiated by reference to the different rights they carried, then they can be described as different classes of shares: [W]hen you have a ... company and the shares are divided into different groups so that one group has quite different rights from another group it makes no difference that the [constitution] avoid[s] the use of the word ‘class. In fact the groups of shares are different, the rights attaching to them are different, with the result that the capital is divided into different classes.“ This approach was reinforced in Clements Marshall Consolidated Ltd v ENT Ltd:

[T]he expression ‘lass of shares’ has no special meaning ... It refers to a category of shares which differs sufficiently in respect of rights, benefits, disabilities, or other incidents, as to make it distinguishable from any other category of shares ... in the capital structure of the company. The second question involves considering whether the rights in question are the type of rights which attract legal protection. Using the language of s 246B, the precise question is whether the rights in question are ‘attached to shares’ that form a class of shares. A useful discussion of this issue is found in Cumbrian Newspapers Group Ltd v Cumberland and Westmorland Herald Newspaper and Printing Co Ltd.®° Scott J identified three different categories of rights. First, there are rights or benefits which attach to particular shares. Dividend and voting rights are common examples. These are legal rights that form part of the shares. Second, there are rights or benefits conferred by the constitution on a person in his or her capacity as a shareholder. Pre-emption rights and the right to appoint a director once a member's shareholding reaches a specified amount are examples. These rights are conferred on a person once they become a member. Third, there are rights that are given to a person in some capacity other than as a member. A provision that confers the right to act as the corporation's solicitor is an example! Of these three types of rights, only the first and second are class rights for the purposes of the variation of class rights provisions in the legislation. The third question is whether the proposed change amounts to a ‘variation or cancellation’ of class rights, which is the expression used in s 246B. There is no legislative definition of this expression. There is a pre-existing body of case law that has considered what constitutes a variation of class rights. An illustration is provided by Greenhalgh v Instead of Greenhalgh finding himself in a position of control, he finds himself in a position where control has gone, and to that extent ... [his rights] are affected as a matter of business. As a matter of law, I am quite unable to hold that, as a result of the transaction, the rights are varied; they remain what they always were ~ a right to have one vote per share pari passu with the ordinary shares for the time being issued which include the new 2s. ordinary shares resulting from the subdivision £2 The Court held that Greenhalgh’s rights had not been varied; instead, his enjoyment of those rights had been lessened. The same approach was taken in White v Bristol Aeroplane Co Ltd where Lord Evershed MR held that ‘there is to my mind a distinction, and a sensible distinction, between an affecting of the rights and an affecting of the enjoyment of the rights‘22 In addition to the three broad questions on whether there has been an alteration of class rights, s 246C of the Corporations Act deems four situations to involve variations: (1) If shares in one class are divided into further classes with the result that the rights attached to all of those shares are not the same, there is a variation of the rights of every share that was in the class before the division (s 246C(1)).24 (2) If the rights attaching to some of the shares in a class are varied, there is a variation of the rights of every other share that was in the class before the variation (s 246C(2)) 22 (3) If a company with only one class of shares issues new shares, there is a variation of the rights of the existing shares if the new shares have different rights and those rights are allowed or not provided for in the company’s constitution or in a notice, document or resolution that is lodged with ASIC (s 246C(5)). (4) If a company issues new preference shares that rank equally with existing preference shares, there is a variation of the rights of the existing preference shares unless the new issue is authorised by the terms of issue of the existing preference shares, or by the company’s constitution as it was at the time the existing shares were issued (s 246C(6)). Once it has been established that a variation (or cancellation) of class rights is involved, s 246B outlines the procedure to be followed. This procedure is in addition to the requirements for altering the constitution if such a change is also required. First, s 246B(1) provides that if the company’s constitution specifies a procedure for the variation or cancellation of rights attached to shares, then that procedure must be followed. That procedure can only be changed if the procedure itself is complied with. Second, and alternatively, if the company has no constitution, or has a constitution that does not specify a variation or cancellation procedure, then the rights can only be varied or cancelled by a special resolution of the company and either a special resolution passed at a meeting of the class of shareholders or with the written consent of members with at least 75 per cent of the votes in the class (s 246B(2)). If the resolution or consent of the class is unanimous, then the variation or cancellation takes effect on the date of the resolution or consent, unless a later time is specified (s 246E). If the resolution or consent is not unanimous, then it takes effect one month later, unless there is a court challenge (s 246D(3)). The words used in s 246B(2) are not clear in relation to which class of members must approve the variation or cancellation. Arguably, it is only those members whose rights have been negatively affected and not the members of the class proposing the change. Section 246B(2)(c) simply states the resolution must be passed at a meeting ‘of the class of members holding shares in the class: A narrow interpretation is consistent with the general purpose of the section; namely, to protect shareholders from having the rights attached to their shares varied or cancelled in a way that is inconsistent with the procedure (if any) set out in the constitution or done without their permission. It is at least arguable that only a separate meeting of members negatively affected by the variation or cancellation needs to be held. Under s 246D, any non-consenting shareholders in a class have a right of appeal to the court to have the variation or cancellation set aside. The application must be made by members who have at least 10 per cent of the votes in that class, and the question to be decided by the court is whether the shareholders in the class have been unfairly prejudiced by the variation, cancellation or modification. If so, the court may set aside the change to the class rights. This chapter focused on how the internal workings of a company are regulated. It discussed the replaceable rules and the corporate constitution. Akey theme in this discussion was that, within certain limits, the persons who set up a company can write their own rules for how that company will operate. There is considerable flexibility to select rules that suit the particular business involved. As a result, the constitution of a large publicly listed company will be quite different from the constitution of a small company. This chapter discussed changes to the law in this area. In particular, the corporate constitution has replaced the former Articles of Association and Memorandum of Association and the ultra vires doctrine has been abolished. Other important issues discussed in this chapter were the statutory contract, members’ right to approve changes to the constitution, and restrictions on the power to vary the rights attaching to shares. These areas of law result in key rights being preserved for members in a company. The nature of the statutory contract means that members can take action in contract to ensure any provisions in the constitution that apply to them are complied with. The statutory and judicial rules that regulate how the constitution can be altered ensure that a special resolution is required, and that any change does not significantly prejudice minority members’ interests. Finally, the common law and statute ensure that members’ approval is required before there is any alteration of class rights. Together, these rules ensure that significant power is given to members in areas of relevance to them. 1 Company Law Review Act 1998 (Cth) s 1414. 2 Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) s 136(1). 2 See, eg, Constitution, Qantas Airways Limited (at 5 November 2021) <https://www.gantas.com/content/dam/qantas/pdfs/about-us/corporate-governance/qantasconstitution.pdf>. 4 Corporations Act s 136(2). 5 See ASX, Listing Rules (at 19 December 2016) r 1.1.

§ Hickman v Kent or Romney Marsh Sheepbreeders’ Association [1915] 1 Ch 881. Z Smolarek v Liwszyc (2006) 32 WAR 101. 8 Ibid [39]. 2 Eley v Positive Government Security Life Assurance Co Ltd (1875) 1 Ex D 20. 12 See, eg, Gibbins Investments Pty Ltd v Savage (2011) 84 ACSR 1.

11 See Links Agricultural Pty Ltd v Shanahan [1999] 1 VR 466; Andrews v Queensland Racing Ltd (2009) 74 ACSR 538. However, other provisions dealing with matters such as directors’ remuneration would not be able to be enforced by a member. 22 Shuttleworth v Cox Brothers & Co (Maidenhead) Ltd [1927] 2 KB 9. 13 Hickman v Kent or Romney Marsh Sheepbreeders’ Association [1915] 1 Ch 881. 14 Ibid 897. 15 Eley v Positive Government Security Life Assurance Co Ltd (1875) 1 Ex D 20.

18The principle established in Eley’s Case was supported in Morris v Hanley (2003) 173 FLR 83. 12 See Shaw Stockbroking Ltd v Australian Stock Exchange Ltd (1998) 26 ACSR 702, 716, afd McLachlan v Australian Stock Exchange (1998) 30 ACSR 26. 18 Re Chinese Cultural Club Ltd (2004) 49 ACSR 568. 12 Myer Queenstown Garden Plaza Pty Ltd v Port Adelaide City Corporation (1975) 11 SASR 504. 20 Colorado Constructions Pty Ltd v Platus (1966) 2 NSWLR 598.

21 Grant v John Grant & Sons Pty Ltd (1950) 82 CLR 1; Carew-Reid v Public Trustee (1996) 20 ACSR 443; Homestake Gold of Australia Ltd v Peninsula Gold Pty Ltd (1996) 20 ACSR 67. 22 Wilson v Meudon Pty Ltd [2006] ANZ ConvR 93. 23 [2010] NSWIRComm 127. 24 Inspector James v Ryan [2009] NSWIRComm 215. 25 Inspector James v Ryan (No 3) [2010] NSWRIRComm 127, [170]. 28 Ibid [158]. 22 Ibid [178].

28 Lion Nathan Australia Pty Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd (2006) 156 FCR 1; Simon v HPM Industries Pty Ltd (1989) 7 ACLC 770. 22 Simon v HPM Industries Pty Ltd (1989) 7 ACLC 770, 778. 32 bid 779. 31 Houldsworth v City of Glasgow Bank (1880) 5 App Cas 317. 32 [2010] NSWSC 89. 33 Dungowan Manly Pty Ltd v McLaughlin (2012) 90 ACSR 62.

34 Cordiant Communication (Australia) Pty Ltd v Communications Group Holdings Pty Ltd (2005) 55 ACSR 185, [131]. See also Michael Duffy, ‘Shareholders Agreements and Shareholders’ Remedies Contract versus Statute?’ (2008) 20(2) Bond Law Review 1. 35 (2006) 156 FCR 1. See also JPG Lessing and R Johns, ‘Resisting a hostile takeover: the Lion Nathan bid for Coopers Brewery’ (Conference Paper, 61st ALTA Conference, 4-7 July

2006) <https://web.archive.org/web/20080727091943/http://epublications.bond.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1104&context=law_pubs>. O Loading. Please wait
