# Chapter 11

Duty of care, skill and diligence 11.05 Introduction 11.10 Common law and equitable foundations
## 11.10.05 The early case law
## 11.10.10 The modern development of the duty of care in the 1980s and 1990s

## 11.10.15 The current common law position 11.15 The Corporations Act duty of care and diligence

## 11.15.10 Corporations Act s 180(2): the business judgment rule

## 11.15.15 Current and future issues for the duty of care and diligence 11.20 Delegation and reliance

## 11.20.05 Delegation

## 11.20.10 Reliance 11.25 Duties arising during insolvency

## 11.25.05 Section 588G

## 11.25.10 Section 588GA

## 11.25.15 Section 588H

## 11.25.20 Section 588GAB

## 11.25.25 Consequences for breach 11.30 Summary

This is the first of three chapters providing an in-depth discussion of directors’ duties. The duties are divided into two themes: duties of care, skill and diligence, and duties of loyalty and good faith. The focus in this chapter is on the duties of care, skill and diligence. These duties are imposed by the common law, equity and ss 180(1) and 588G of the Corporations Act. This chapter commences with the common law and equitable foundations of the duty of care, skill and diligence, and considers their adoption into statute and the current law within s 180(1). It examines the safe harbour provided by the business judgment rule in s 180(2), and recent discussion on the scope and application of that rule. This chapter examines the ability of directors to delegate their duties and to reasonably rely on the information or advice provided by certain types of persons. Finally, the chapter considers the requirements imposed on directors and officers as a company approaches insolvency in ss 588G and 588GAB. The chapters that follow then consider the duties of loyalty and good faith: Chapter 12 discusses the various duties of good faith, and Chapter 13 canvasses the loyalty element through the duties relating to conflicts of interest. Although these three chapters refer to ‘directors, the duties may be owed by others including de facto directors (Section 10.20.05), shadow directors (Section
## 10.20.10), officers, shadow officers and senior management employees (Section 10.20.15).

## 11.10.05 The early case law

Before directors’ duties were enacted in legislation, they arose through the common law and equity. These duties still arise in negligence, in equity, and can also be established in contract under the terms of service between an executive director and company.2 As noted in Section 10.30, unlike other aspects of corporate law, it is not appropriate to simply focus on what is set out in the Corporations Act. The scope and content of the general law duties, which has developed significantly over the past century, remains operational and impacts on the court's interpretation of the statutory provisions. The duty of care, skill and diligence was established in cases from the nineteenth century, initially as a subjective standard of care, dependent on the characteristics of the director in question. This mirrored the role and expectations of directors, when companies appointed large boards and where directorships were an office of status, with little regard to the appointed person's interest or skill in the position. These elements are present in a well-known example from that period, Re Cardiff Savings Bank, which involved the Marquis of Bute, who was installed on the board of directors of the Cardiff Savings Bank as an infant of six months old. Nearly 40 years later, when the bank became insolvent, his behaviour as a director was examined. The liquidator contended that the Marquis was liable for neglect or omission in not complying with the regulations in relation to examinations of the accounts. At the time of liquidation, there were 55 ‘trustees and managers, including the Marquis, and Stirling J held that it ‘could not be expected that each member of the body should take a very active part in the management, or attend every meeting’ The threshold for ‘very active’ appears to have been almost non-existent in the 1800s, as the Marquis had attended one meeting of the trustees and managers in 1869, signed the minutes on that occasion, but had never attended again nor taken part in the business of the bank.2 His Honour stated the duty on directors at that time to be ‘to use fair and reasonable diligence in the management of their company’s affairs'® When considering the standard of duty to be imposed on the Marquis, Stirling J held:2 It may be that he neglected, as he certainly omitted, to attend the meetings to which he was summoned. But neglect or omission to attend meetings is not, in my opinion, the same thing as neglect or omission of a duty which ought to be performed at those meetings ... To hold that the Marquis was guilty of neglect or omission in respect of this duty, in the absence of any knowledge or notice that it was not duly performed, would, in my opinion be to fix him with liability for the neglect and omission of others rather than his own. This was, clearly, a very low standard of care, and within a few decades the common law began to shift towards a more objective position. Evidence of this shift can be seen in the case of Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Ltd® In that case, Romer J made statements with respect to the three elements of care, skill and diligence, which demonstrate this shift and are the genesis of the more objective modern duty of care. In relation to care, Romer J held that ‘reasonable care must be, | think, measured by the care an ordinary man [sic] might be expected to take in the same circumstances on his own behalf’? This introduced some objectivity into the duty, without entirely removing the subjectivity evident in earlier years. After that statement, Romer J added two general propositions in relation to skill and diligence. In relation to skill, his Honour also retained some subjectivity:!2 A director need not exhibit in the performance of his [sic] duties a greater degree of skill than may reasonably be expected from a person of his knowledge and experience. A director of a life insurance company, for instance, does not guarantee that he has the skill of an actuary or of a physician. In relation to diligence, his Honour stated that:

A director is not bound to give continuous attention to the affairs of his [sic] company. His duties are of an intermittent nature. In respect of all duties that ... may properly be left to some other official, a director is, in the absence of grounds for suspicion, justified in trusting that official to perform such duties honestly. This mix of objectivity and subjectivity, retaining an emphasis on the circumstances of the particular director concerned, remained the test for the standard of care in Australia until the 1980s. In response to the high-profile corporate collapses in the late 1980s, a number of reforms amended the statutory directors’ duties and enabled greater access to remedies against directors, leading to a significant increase in cases on directors’ duties and development in the law. The the court’s emphasis on a higher, more objective standard of care from directors. At the same time these reports were published, a landmark series of cases were decided, which would ultimately confirm an objective standard of care for the duty under the general law. One of the most significant cases occurred in the AWA litigation. AWA Ltd was a publicly listed electronics equipment company that was deriving nearly 25 per cent of its profit from foreign exchange currency trading, a relatively new concept in corporate Australia in the 1980s. AWA had initially engaged in currency exchange trading due to the volatility of currency values at the time. This had a particular impact on their business due to the delay between entering an import contract with a foreign manufacturer and the eventual delivery and time for payment under the contract. Approximately three years later, AWA appointed Mr Koval as foreign exchange manager and expanded their managed foreign exchange trading. Within two years, AWA incurred large losses on the foreign currency market. Koval operated with no effective supervision within the company. Koval concealed foreign exchange trading losses amounting to nearly $50 million by making unauthorised loans to cover those losses. Some of the deficiencies in AWA’ internal controls, particularly in relation to Koval’s conduct, were uncovered by Mr Daniels, who worked for the accounting firm that has now become Deloitte. Daniels had been engaged by AWA to audit the company’s accounts and internal processes. This information was conveyed to the managing director of AWA, Mr Hooke. However, Hooke and Daniels did not pass that information up to the board of AWA. When AWA became aware of the losses, it brought proceedings against Daniels and the accounting firm for negligence in failing to report these findings to the board; in particular, in relation to the activities and lack of control surrounding the foreign currency trading activities. Daniels counterclaimed against the directors of AWA, alleging a breach of their duty of care, skill and diligence. Two important decisions followed: AWA Ltd v Daniels, the first instance decision of Rogers CJ in the Commercial Division of the New South Wales Supreme Court; and Daniels v Anderson, the appellate decision in that court, in particular the majority judgment of Sheller and Clarke JJA. At first instance, Rogers CJ confirmed that the duty of care, skill and diligence is an equitable and statutory obligation.18 However, contrary to the older case law, his Honour held that this duty was objective and required the directors to take reasonable steps to place themselves in a position to guide and monitor the company.!2 That required a general understanding of the business of the company and the effect of the changing economy on that business. Directors needed to’bring an informed and independent judgment to bear on the various matters that come to the Board for decision’2° This was a significant shift from the previous threshold in relation to the skill of directors. No longer would a director be judged against their own personal knowledge or experience. Now, each director was expected to attain a minimum level of understanding of the business and business practice. Referring back to Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Ltd,2" Rogers CJ did recognise that the board of a large public company cannot manage the day-to-day business of the company, and must by necessity rely on the executives of the company to perform that role.22 Further, his Honour was prepared to draw a distinction between executive and non-executive directors, finding a lesser standard of care for non-executive directors.73 This had an impact upon his Honour's findings as to the element of diligence: A non-executive director does not have to turn him or herself into an auditor, managing director, chairman or other officer ... In relation to auditors, if directors appoint a person of good repute and competence to audit the accounts, absent real grounds for suspecting that the auditor is wrong, the directors have discharged their duty24 On appeal in Daniels v Anderson,2® the majority of Sheller and Clarke JJA (Powell JA dissenting on the question of the directors’ duty of care) largely upheld the judgment of Rogers CJ at first instance. The majority agreed with Rogers CJ that directors are required to inform themselves about the affairs of the company.2° An objective standard of care was firmly established: There is no doubt reason for establishing a board which enjoys the varied wisdom of persons drawn from different commercial backgrounds. Even so a director, whatever his or her background, has a duty greater than that of simply representing a particular field of experience. That duty involves becoming familiar with the business of the company and how it is run and ensuring that the board has available means to audit the management of the company so that it can satisfy itself that the company is being properly run. ... In our opinion the responsibilities of directors require that they take reasonable steps to place themselves in a position to guide and monitor the management of the company.22 The Court of Appeal agreed that the non-executive directors of AWA were not negligent, but unlike Rogers CJ at first instance, their Honours were less inclined to draw a strict differentiation between the standard of care of executive and non-executive directors. Commenting directly on the extract quoted above, Sheller and Clarke JJA stated that ‘it does not accurately state the extent of the duty of directors whether non-executive or not in modern company law’28 Their Honours concluded that there should not be any differentiation between executive and non-executive directors and stated ‘the director's duty of care is not merely subjective, limited by the director’s knowledge and experience or ignorance or inaction’2 As these and other similar cases were progressing through the courts,2° the statutory duty of care was being reformulated to clarify the objective nature of the duty. Beyond objectivity, the redrafting was designed to take into account the particular circumstances of the company, the manner in which it internally distributes roles and responsibilities, and the particular expertise a director may possess.2! There was some debate, following the decision in Daniels v Anderson and the rejection of a distinction between executive and non-executive directors, as to whether the statutory duty should be amended to reintroduce recognition of the differences in qualifications and experience of the individual director Ultimately, the amended provision, which remains as the current s 180(1) of the Corporations Act, did not include that particular element.

## 11.10.15 The current common law position

The duty of care, skill and diligence in the common law is recognised to be generally the same as the duty expressed in s 180(1) of the Corporations Act. However, the statutory duty continues to be informed by the duty at common law. Both the common law and statutory formulations are concerned with reviewing the actions of a director in terms of the performance of a ‘reasonable person, being a director of a company in the same circumstances, in the same position as that director, and having the same responsibilities. Since the AWA decisions, it is accepted that directors are required to take reasonable steps to place themselves in a position to guide and monitor the management of the company.22 This means that: (1) a director should become familiar with the fundamentals of the business in which the corporation is engaged (2) a director is under a continuing obligation to keep informed about the activities of the corporation (3) directorial management requires a general monitoring of corporate affairs and policies, by way of regular attendance at board meetings (4) a director should maintain familiarity with the financial status of the corporation by a regular review of financial statements. Indeed, he or she will be unable to avoid liability for insolvent trading by claiming that they had never learned to read financial statements.*4 not in modern company law’28 Their Honours concluded that there should not be any differentiation between executive and non-executive directors and stated ‘the director's duty of care is not merely subjective, limited by the director's knowledge and experience or ignorance or inaction’22 As these and other similar cases were progressing through the courts,2° the statutory duty of care was being reformulated to clarify the objective nature of the duty. Beyond objectivity, the redrafting was designed to take into account the particular circumstances of the company, the manner in which it internally distributes roles and responsibilities, and the particular expertise a director may possess.2! There was some debate, following the decision in Daniels v Anderson and the rejection of a distinction between executive and non-executive directors, as to whether the statutory duty should be amended to reintroduce recognition of the differences in qualifications and experience of the individual director.22 Ultimately, the amended provision, which remains as the current s 180(1) of the Corporations Act, did not include that particular element.
## 11.10.15 The current common law position

Directors, whether executive or non-executive, are engaged by the company through a contract. For executive directors, this will be a contract of service or employment; whereas, for non-executive directors, it will be a letter of engagement or appointment.® The scope of any additional contractual duties and obligations owed by a director to the company will depend on the terms of the contract between the parties, although there will generally be an implied duty of skill and care imposed where professional services are proffered:®The High Court considered this in Astley v Austrust Ltd in relation to solicitors advising a trustee company, with the majority finding that ‘[t]he implied term of reasonable care in a contract of professional services arises by operation of law. It is one of those terms that the law attaches as an incident of contracts of that class/22 The duty of care in contract is similar in nature to the duty under s 180(1) of the Corporations Act: that the director exercises the care and skill expected of a person who occupies the position in question. The standard of care at common law and in equity is that of an objective reasonable person in a similar position to the director in question. All formulations of the duty are concerned with reviewing the actions of a director in terms of the performance of a reasonable person, being a director of a company in the same circumstances, in the same position as that director and having the same responsibilities. However, purely personal circumstances are not considered relevant, such as the standard of education or business experience. Daniels v Anderson“2 remains authority for the position that there is a minimum standard of care and diligence that applies to both executive and non-executive directors, but Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Healey,“3 discussed below, indicates that the penalties will be different for an executive or non-executive director. There is a core of non-reducible skills, but if the director holds themselves out as having a particular skill on appointment they will be expected to utilise that skill in performance of their duties. Courts have cautioned, repeatedly,“4 that the context of each case will be key to analysing whether the objective standard of care and diligence has been met, and that general statements as to the standard must be ‘viewed with a degree of circumspection having regard to the fact-specific nature of the inquiry’42 (1) a director should become familiar with the fundamentals of the business in which the corporation is engaged (2) a director is under a continuing obligation to keep informed about the activities of the corporation (3) directorial management requires a general monitoring of corporate affairs and policies, by way of regular attendance at board meetings A director also owes a tortious duty to exercise care and skill in the performance of their functions and the discharge of the duties of their office8 A director is under a common law duty of care and can be liable as a tortfeasor for negligence.*? If there is negligence in performing a contract, alternative claims may exist in both contract and tort 4° However, it is possible to contract out of a tortious duty. A director's duty of care and skill to the company is further recognised as an equitable duty“ Section 185 of the Corporations Act preserves the power of the company to enforce these duties in the general law. The distinction between a breach of these duties and a breach of the Act is twofold. First, there is a distinction as to who may bring an action for breach, as the company can bring an action for a breach of the general law duties, but only ASIC may seek a declaration of contravention under s 1317E for a breach of the civil penalty provisions.“¢ If a breach can be demonstrated, then the court must order a declaration of contravention. Second, there is a distinction as to what remedies can be sought, as discussed in detail in Chapter 10 at Section 10.35. We now consider the duty of care, skill and diligence imposed by the Corporations Act. Section 185 of the Corporations Act preserves the operation of the duty of care, skill and diligence alongside the legislative duties. As such, breaches of the general law often occur concurrently with breaches of the Corporations Act. ASIC is the only party who can seek a declaration of contravention, or the disqualification of a director, or a pecuniary penalty order.“ This does not prevent a company from claiming that directors have breached the provisions of the Act. It only prevents the company from seeking those penalties available exclusively to ASIC following a declaration of contravention. The company can seek a compensation order under s 1317H, to compensate for damage“® caused to the corporation by a breach of a civil penalty provision, including s 180(1), regardless of whether a declaration of contravention has been ordered.*2 Equally, should ASIC take action, the company may seek compensation by intervening in an application by ASIC under s 1317J(3), or may apply on its own behalf under s 1317J(2). The legislative duties that reflect the duties of care and diligence are contained in ss 180(1) and 588G. We start our discussion with the duty of care and diligence under s 180(1).

## 11.15.05 Corporations Act s 180(1): the duty of care and di Section 180(1) states:

(a) were a director or officer of a corporation in the corporation's circumstances; and (b) occupied the office held by, and had the same responsibilities within the corporation as, the director or officer.®2 The influence of the general law on the duty of care, skill and diligence is clear from the format of the duty in the Corporations Act. As discussed at Sections
## 11.10.05-10, the test is objective but is tempered by the subjective circumstances of the particular company and the director's role and functions. Directors
must exercise a reasonable degree of care and diligence. Determining whether this has been the case will involve an examination of the context of the particular company and directors*! and ‘by balancing the foreseeable risk of harm against the potential benefits that could reasonably have been expected to accrue to the company from the conduct in question’=2 The company does not need to suffer actual loss or damage in order for s 180(1) to have been breached —what is required is a foreseeable risk of harm, which can include the risk of suffering penalties for breaching the law or harm to reputation. The requirement for care and diligence is subject to s 180(2), known as the ‘business judgment rule’, which creates a ‘safe harbour’ for directors. The business judgment rule does not have a counterpart in common law or equity, but s 180(2) is stated to apply to those duties as well. The trend in the general law over the past two centuries towards higher standards of behaviour expected from directors has continued in relation to cases dealing with the statutory provisions. As under the general law, the difficulty with applying the objective s 180(1) duty to the behaviour of a director is the requirement to assess the position of the director in question. The office of the director, the role that they perform, and the distribution of responsibilities within that company must be closely considered. This was evident in the cases that followed ASIC’s investigation into the collapse of One.Tel, which were some of the first decisions to consider the newly enacted Corporations Act. Prior to its collapse in 2001, One.Tel was the fourth largest telecommunications company in Australia, with operations in seven countries, 1.9 million customers and valued at $3.5 billion. Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich*4 was a preliminary decision as to ASIC's cause of action against a number of directors and officers involved in the collapse, where Austin J considered the duties of the non-executive chairman of One.Tel, Mr Greaves. Greaves held qualifications as a chartered accountant and was also the chair of One.Tel’s finance and audit committee. Greaves argued that a non-executive chair had no special duties over and above the other directors, and that the reference in s 180(1)(b) to‘responsibilities’ limited the application of the s 180(1) duty to specific tasks delegated through the articles of the company or by resolution or otherwise.*> The Court rejected these propositions, finding that a non-executive chairman did owe duties to the company to act with due care, and that Greaves’ failure to remain informed as to the company’s financial position gave rise to a breach of s 180(1).¢ Further, Greaves’ particular background, expertise and appointment to the finance and audit committees contributed to the standard of care owed to the company.=2 Following this, the Court ordered a declaration of contravention under s 1317E for a breach of s 180(1), and a period of disqualification for four years under ss 206C and 206E for Greaves, based on an agreed set of facts.# its assets against the claims of involuntary tort creditors, led to an inquiry examining the relationship between the funding shortfall and the JHIL restructure, led by David Jackson QC. In 2004, the Jackson Inquiry determined that, although the JHIL restructure was not in breach of the Corporations Act, there was a serious question as to whether that indicated a deficiency in the law. There were further questions posed as to the role of corporate governance, and of director and officer liability for statements made on the funding of MRCF during the restructuring process. Subsequent to the report, ASIC commenced civil penalty proceedings against a number of former executives and former and current directors of JHIL. This led to a complex set of cases, including Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Macdonald (No 11); the appeal by all defendants (excluding the CEO, Mr Macdonald) in Morley v Australian Securities and Investments Commission;£. two High Court appeals in relation to that appeal: Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Hellicar®2 and Shafron v Australian Securities and Investments Commission;®2 a separate trial judgment on the question of relief under s 1317S, Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Macdonald (No 12); and its appeal in Gilfillan v Australian Securities and Investments Commission. In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Macdonald (No 11), ASIC brought 52 allegations of contraventions of the Corporations Act against JHIL, the Netherlands-based JHINV, 7 non-executive directors and 3 executive officers. Ultimately, Gzell J found that 33 of the contraventions were proven, including breaches of the s 180(1) duty of care and diligence by all directors and officers charged. These breaches were associated with misleading and deceptive conduct, making false statements in relation to securities and breaches of the continuous disclosure rules, which centred on the press release regarding the sufficiency of the funding provided to the MRCF. Gzell J focused on what had been discussed at a board meeting held on 15 February 2001, prior to the final ASX announcement on 16 February 2001. The announcement stated: James Hardie Industries Limited (JHIL) announced today that it had established a foundation to compensate sufferers of asbestosrelated diseases with claims against two former James Hardie subsidiaries and fund medical research aimed at finding cures for these diseases. ‘The Medical Research and Compensation Foundation (MRCP), to be chaired by Sir Llewellyn Edwards, will be completely independent of JHIL and will commence operation with assets of $293 million. ‘The Foundation has sufficient funds to meet all legitimate compensation claims anticipated from people injured by asbestos products that were manufactured in the past by two former subsidiaries of JHIL. JHIL CEO, Mr Peter Macdonald said that the establishment of a fully-funded Foundation provided certainty for both claimants and shareholders. ... ‘James Hardie is satisfied that the Foundation has sufficient funds to meet anticipated future claims? Mr Macdonald said. At trial, evidence from JHIL’s expert financial advisors indicated that the funding provided was only sufficient if a complex set of assumptions as to the future rate of claims, investment returns across a period of 50 years, and longevity of the fund proved to be correct. The Court held that the directors and officers would have known that these were unrealistic assumptions, which led to the conclusion that the directors and officers should have known that the announcement claiming that the MCRF was fully funded was misleading. All of the non-executive directors who gave evidence in the trial claimed that the draft ASX announcement was either not before the meeting of 15 February 2001, not discussed, or not approved. Gzell J found that the directors were mistaken, and that the announcement must have been considered or approved at that meeting.© The Court then considered whether the approval of that draft announcement was in breach of s 180(1). The non-executive directors who gave evidence also stated that, had the announcement been considered, they would not have approved it. Gzell J considered that this evidence accorded with the fact that the non-executive directors knew it contained false or misleading or deceptive statements, being ‘unequivocal and unqualified’ statements as to the sufficiency of funding.8 Approving the announcement was consequently a breach of their duties under s 180(1). The executive officers were equally found to be in breach of their duties for failing to properly advise the board as to the limitations of the restructuring plan and the misleading nature of the announcement. The question as to whether the non-executive directors were entitled to delegate this matter or rely on the advice of others in relation to the drafting of the announcement is discussed at Section 11.20.10. All defendants except the CEO, Mr Macdonald, appealed in Morley v Australian Securities and Investments Commission 2° On appeal, Gzell J's finding of fact that the announcement had been approved at the meeting of 15 February 2001 was overturned, and ASIC's case against the non-executive directors failed. However, the Court of Appeal upheld the findings against the executive directors, Morley and Shafron, in relation to their failure to properly brief the board All defendants except the CEO, Mr Macdonald, appealed in Morley v Australian Securities and Investments Commission2° On appeal, Gzell J's finding of fact that the announcement had been approved at the meeting of 15 February 2001 was overturned, and ASIC's case against the non-executive directors failed. However, the Court of Appeal upheld the findings against the executive directors, Morley and Shafron, in relation to their failure to properly brief the board and company in relation to the actuarial model. ASIC appealed the decision on the question of approval of the announcement and the liability of the non-executive directors in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Hellicar“! and of the liability of the company secretary and general counsel in Shafron v Australian Securities and Investments Commission22 The High Court in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Hellicar was satisfied that there was sufficient evidence that the board had approved the announcement; with the result that Gzell J's original findings of contravention against the non-executive directors were reinstated. The matter was then remitted to the New South Wales Court of Appeal for appeals against penalties.2 The arguments raised in Shafron v Australian Securities and Investments Commission were discussed in detail in Chapter 10 at Section 10.20.15. A final point of interest from the High Court judgment in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Hellicar is the discussion by Heydon J in relation to the overseas directors, who attended the meeting of 15 February by telephone from the United States. Heydon J, in a separate but concurring judgment, agreed with Gzell J at first instance that, by their silence, those directors voted in favour of the resolution approving the draft ASX announcement. The overseas directors contended they were not supplied with the draft, and that consequently they were not in breach of their duty of care and diligence because they had given careful consideration to what was before them. The overseas directors argued they had no duty to attend to anything more unless the chair ensured that they had access to the relevant information. Heydon J rejected that argument, finding that ‘the onus was on [the overseas directors] to be cautious when voting on the making of the announcement—either by seeking further information or by explicitly abstaining’2> This provides greater context to the duty of care, skill and diligence as it applies to overseas directors, with the onus on them to ensure that they have the appropriate material to make an informed decision or to abstain from voting. The choices made by ASIC in pursuing this litigation were subject to criticism. In the Court of Appeal, it was argued that ASIC was subject to a duty of fairness in relation to prosecuting civil penalty proceedings. The Court held ASIC had failed to discharge this duty due to the decision not to call the company’s solicitor, Mr Robb, who had prepared the draft minutes before the 15 February meeting and was present at the meeting.2° The High Court was critical of the Court of Appeal’s discussion of the source of such a duty,Z but agreed that ASIC must be subject to a duty that can be described as a duty to conduct litigation fairly28 Australian Securities and Investments Commission22 The High Court in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Hellicar was satisfied that there was sufficient evidence that the board had approved the announcement; with the result that Gzell J's original findings of contravention against the non-executive directors were reinstated. The matter was then remitted to the New South Wales Court of Appeal for appeals against penalties.2 The arguments raised in Shafron v Australian Securities and Investments Commission were discussed in detail in Chapter 10 at Section 10.20.15. The JHIL litigation, particularly against the non-executive directors, raises questions as to director liability under s 180(1) for permitting a company to breach the law. Finding a director personally responsible for any breach of the law by the company has been described as the ‘stepping stones’ approach to director liability22 and has been subject to criticism£2 However, ASIC has been successful in the past decade at using this mechanism to enforce the statutory duty of care against directors for the company’s breach of the law.2! Brereton J, in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Maxwell,22 considered that a director who causes or allows a company to breach the law is in breach of s 180(1) if they failed to balance the potential benefits to the company with the risk associated with the breach. This basis for liability is instead of any ‘general obligation owed by directors at large to conduct the affairs of the company in accordance with the law generally or the Corporations Act in particular’®? In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Cassimatis,24 Reeves J raised concern that using this test could encourage law-breaking, as long as the rewards for the company in breach were high enough to outweigh the costs. In Australian Securities Investments Commission v Mariner Corporation,®2 Beach J suggested that a relevant distinction could be made between cases where a director deliberately causes a company to breach the law, in contrast to a decision that inadvertently causes non-compliance. Given ASIC's successes in relation to action for false or misleading representations of the environmental or sustainability credentials (‘green-washing’) of investment fund products,2° the potential impact of a stepping stones argument for director liability is significant. This question will be further considered at Section 11.15.10 in relation to the application of the business judgment rule to circumstances where the company has breached the law. While the James Hardie litigation was working its way through the courts, the Centro Property Group was the focus of an ASIC investigation, following the discovery there had been significant errors in the company’s 2007 annual report provided to the ASX. In July 2007, shortly before the annual report was filed with the ASX, the board reviewed submissions from the CFO in relation to a refinancing proposal to obtain significant bridging loans from major creditors in exchange for guarantees from the Group. When the annual report was filed with the ASX, it failed to disclose this refinancing, the approximately $1.5 billion of short-term liabilities in relation to the financing (instead, classifying them as ‘non-current liabilities’), and the four guarantees of short-term liabilities of approximately US$1.75 billion given after the balance date of 30 June 2007. Although the Group had notified the ASX in December 2007 of a halt in trading in its securities, and made a series of announcements across the next three months concerning the corrections, ASIC alleged® that the CFO and directors of the relevant companies within the Group had breached ss 180(1), 34488 and 601FD(1)(b) 22 Given that the directors’ errors in this case related to complex financial documentation, questions arose as to the level of financial literacy required of directors and the ability of the directors to rely on the information provided to them by management and external advisors, such as auditors. The question of reliance will be considered at Section 11.20.10. On the question of the duty of care and diligence, Middleton J found that the errors in the annual report were so obvious that the conclusion that the directors had been negligent was inescapable.2° Under a heading within the judgment titled ‘Reality Check’ Middleton J considered the directors’ argument that ASIC was trying to extend their responsibility ‘beyond reasonable financial literacy and a proper degree of engage- a thn atten hata. Given that the directors’ errors in this case related to complex financial documentation, questions arose as to the level of financial literacy required of directors and the ability of the directors to rely on the information provided to them by management and external advisors, such as auditors. The question of reliance will be considered at Section 11.20.10. On the question of the duty of care and diligence, Middleton J found that the errors in the annual report were so obvious that the conclusion that the directors had been negligent was inescapable.2° Under a heading within the judgment titled ‘Reality Check’ Middleton J considered the directors’ argument that ASIC was trying to extend their responsibility ‘beyond reasonable financial literacy and a proper degree of engagement in the affairs of a company’ In refuting the directors’ argument, his Honour held: Each director relied completely on the processes in place and their advisors. All the directors failed to see the ‘obvious errors’ because they all took the same approach in relying exclusively upon those processes and advisors. No director stood back, armed with [their] own knowledge, and looked at and considered for [themselves] the financial statements. ... [A]ll that was required of the directors in this proceeding was the financial literacy to understand basic accounting conventions and proper diligence in reading the financial statements. The directors had the required accumulated knowledge of the affairs of Centro, based upon the documents placed before them and discussion at board meetings. Each director then needed to formulate [their] own opinion, and apply that opinion to the task of approving the financial statements.2 There was concern in the wake of the Centro decision as to the level of knowledge of complex and detailed accounting standards expected of directors. The statement from Middleton J makes it clear that the primary concern was the failure by the directors to turn their minds to the question of the accuracy of the financial statements. Additionally, the notes attached to the annual report stated that ‘[b]orrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the balance sheet date’, which is consistent with the applicable accounting standard (AASB 101). As the directors knew that the Group was negotiating with its creditors, they must have known there could be no unconditional right to defer settlement. As such, no complex accounting knowledge was required in this instance—reading the reports and the definitions should have alerted the directors to the error. Although Middleton J was not prepared to differentiate between the executive and non-executives in regard to their duty of care and diligence, his Honour Although Middleton J was not prepared to differentiate between the executive and non-executives in regard to their duty of care and diligence, his Honour did impose significantly different penalties on the basis of that distinction. In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Healey (No 2),°4 no penalties or disqualifications were ordered against the non-executive directors. His Honour discussed the need for penalties to act as a general deterrent, and noted that the denial of access to ss 1317S and 1318 relief®2 and the declarations of contravention could be considered punitive. This is in addition to the ‘reputational damage to the defendants, including the directors, and the effect it has and will have on them, [which] cannot be underestimated in the case of these particular directors‘22 By contrast, the CEO was subject to a $30,000 civil penalty and the CFO was disqualified from managing corporations for two years. The effect of this line of cases is that the duty of care and diligence under s 180(1) imposes the same standard of care as the common law and equity.2 Directors have a core, irreducible requirement of involvement in monitoring the performance of the company. There is no distinction made between the duty imposed upon an executive and a non-executive director,22 and non-executive directors are expected to engage with the task of directing the company and not simply rely on the opinion of the executive directors or management. Further, a director's duty of care may be increased in circumstances where their appointment was on the basis of a special set of skills or knowledge, or where they have accepted appointment to a specialist committee of the directors. The duty of care and diligence is a key component in the balancing act undertaken by the law, to ensure appropriate corporate conduct through regulation of director behaviour. The duty requires directors to be positively engaged in the task of ‘directing’ the company, taking care and responsibility for their decisions, employing appropriate skills on behalf of the company, and being diligent and conscientious in their attendance and engagement with their role via board meetings. However, it is important that the duty does not inappropriately restrict the degree of discretion that should be afforded to those in senior corporate roles in order to conduct business successfully. As part of that balance, we now turn to consider the application of the business judgment rule in s 180(2) to a claim of breach of s 180(1) and the Historically, there has been reluctance by the courts to review the business merits of decisions of the directors and management. Directors in whom are vested the right and the duty of deciding where the company’s interests lie and how they are to be served may be concerned with a wide range of practical considerations, and their judgment, if exercised in good faith and not for irrelevant purposes, is not open to review in the courts122 However, as the duty of care, skill and diligence has become more objective, the business community has voiced concerns that this would constrain appropriate business risk-taking! From 1989 to 1991, a series of recommendations were made to introduce a statutory business judgment rule along the lines of the common law doctrine that existed in the United States.122 In 1999, the business judgment rule was introduced together with the redrafted s 180(1)2% The Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill introducing these amendments stated that:

‘The fundamental purpose of the business judgment rule is to protect the authority of directors in the exercise of their duties, not to insulate directors from liability. While it is accepted that directors should be subject to a high level of accountability, a failure to expressly acknowledge that directors should not be liable for decisions made in good faith and with due care, may lead to failure by the company and its directors to take advantage of opportunities that involve responsible risk taking. ‘The statutory formulation of the business judgment rule will clarify and confirm the common law position that the Courts will rarely review bona fide business decisions. However the statutory formulation will provide a clear presumption in favour of a director's judgment. Directors in whom are vested the right and the duty of deciding where the company’s interests lie and how they are to be served may be concerned with a wide range of practical considerations, and their judgment, if exercised in good faith and not for irrelevant purposes, is not open to review in the courts.122 business decisions. However the statutory formulation will provide a clear presumption in favour of a director's judgment.124 The business judgment rule, contained in s 180(2) of the Corporations Act, operates to exculpate a director who has made a well-informed business decision: A director or other officer of a corporation who makes a business judgment is taken to meet the requirements of subsection (1), and their equivalent duties at common law and in equity, in respect of the judgment if they: (a) make the judgment in good faith for a proper purpose; and (b) do not have a material personal interest in the subject matter of the judgment; and (c) inform themselves about the subject matter of the judgment to the extent they reasonably believe to be appropriate; and (d) rationally believe that the judgment is in the best interests of the corporation. The director's or officer's belief that the judgment is in the best interests of the corporation is a rational one unless the belief is one that no reasonable person in their position would hold. Section 180(3) defines a ‘business judgment to be any ‘decision to take or not take action in respect of a matter relevant to the business operations of the corporation’ Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Adler confirmed that a business judgment does not extend to a failure to consider the matter at all.1°5 A decision not to comply with the requirements of the Corporations Act will also not be a ‘business judgment: The Full Federal Court considered the application of s 180(2) in such circumstances in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Fortescue Metals Group Ltd, although that decision was consequently overturned by the High Court1% Fortescue Metals Group Ltd released a series of ASX announcements in 2004, stating that it had entered into legally binding framework agreements with certain Chinese companies to finance and build mining infrastructure in Western Australia. When the media questioned the binding nature of these agreements, Fortescue's share price fell significantly. ASIC commenced an investigation, and ultimately proceedings against Fortescue, for misleading statements under s 1041H of the Corporations Act and the continuous disclosure provision in s 674 for failing to correct the earlier announcement.122 ASIC argued that Fortescue's director, Mr Forrest, was involved in Fortescue’s contravention and had breached s 180(1). Although ASIC was unsuccessful at first instance®8 on appeal the Full Federal Court found that the ASX release was misleading and deceptive, and considered Forrest's breach of s 180. Keane CJ cited the Explanatory Memorandum to the Act, which provided that ‘compliance (or otherwise) with the prospectus requirements imposed by the Law would not be a decision’ under s 180(2).1°2 This accords with the position in United States that the business judgment rule is not available for a decision by directors to knowingly cause or permit the company to break the law. This point of law was not discussed in the High Court appeal, which ultimately reversed the Full Federal Court’s finding on liability By contrast, in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Vocation Ltd (in liq), Nicholas J held that a decision to permit the publication of an ASX announcement that was likely to mislead its readers was not a ‘decision to take action in respect of a matter relevant to the business operations of Vocation’ and consequently was not a business judgment2 Section 180(2) was considered in depth in the decision of Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich,3 mentioned previously at Section
## 11.15.05. ASIC argued that Mr Rich and Mr Silbermann, joint CEO and Finance Director respectively, breached s 180(1) by failing to advise the board of
One.Tel Ltd that the company was insolvent. However, Austin J found that ASIC failed to prove the company was insolvent at the relevant time, and so ASIC's argument on the duty of care and diligence also failed. During the judgment, his Honour gave detailed consideration to a number of elements of the business judgment rule.“ In particular, the definition of ‘business judgment in s 180(3) was interpreted to include decisions in preparation of making a business judgment, such as planning, budgeting and forecasting, setting of policy goals or division of responsibilities within the board and management!5 However, his Honour was not prepared to extend the s 180(2) rule to directors’ monitoring and oversight duties, including monitoring of the company’s financial position, as these did not involve decision-making.16 Another important question is whether the business judgment rule operates as a presumption in favour of the directors or as a defence, which has ramifications as to who bears the onus of proof. Austin J in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich considered that this question needed to be resolved at an appellate level, although as yet there has been no binding appellate consideration of this issue112 Section 180(2) was considered in depth in the decision of Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich,3 mentioned previously at Section

## 11.15.05. ASIC argued that Mr Rich and Mr Silbermann, joint CEO and Finance Director respectively, breached s 180(1) by failing to advise the board of
One.Tel Ltd that the company was insolvent. However, Austin J found that ASIC failed to prove the company was insolvent at the relevant time, and so ASIC's argument on the duty of care and diligence also failed. During the judgment, his Honour gave detailed consideration to a number of elements of the business judgment rule.“ In particular, the definition of ‘business judgment in s 180(3) was interpreted to include decisions in preparation of making a business judgment, such as planning, budgeting and forecasting, setting of policy goals or division of responsibilities within the board and management!5 However, his Honour was not prepared to extend the s 180(2) rule to directors’ monitoring and oversight duties, including monitoring of the company’s financial position, as these did not involve decision-making.® Another important question is whether the business judgment rule operates as a presumption in favour of the directors or as a defence, which has ramifications as to who bears the onus of proof. Austin J in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich considered that this question needed to be resolved at an appellate level, although as yet there has been no binding appellate consideration of this issue 112 The Explanatory Memorandum stated that the ‘[p]roposed subsection 180(2) acts as a rebuttable presumption in favour of directors which, if rebutted by a plaintiff, would mean the plaintiff would then still have to establish that the officer had breached their duty of care and diligence’!"8 However, without reference to that paragraph and with ‘some hesitation in light of the US approach; Austin J in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich concluded that s 180(2) operates as a defence, and consequently that the burden of proof falls on the defendant._2 The question of whether this provision operates as a defence and not a presumption has been considered academically.!° First, a presumption may be more consistent with the policy underlying the introduction to s 180(2) to encourage ‘directors to take advantage of opportunities that involve responsible risk taking’ and the mention of ‘rebuttable presumption’ in the Explanatory Memorandum.2! Second, a presumption operating in favour of directors exercising a business judgment is consistent with the common law doctrine. Finally, it is consistent with the drafting of s 180(2), in that a plaintiff may rebut the presumption by disproving one element only. For it to function as a defence, a director must establish all elements. However, where it has been considered by the courts, it has been applied as a defence,!22 with the onus of proof falling on the director who relies on the various sub-sections to establish the requirements.122 These cases demonstrate that, although it has been over two decades since the business judgment rule in s 180(2) was introduced, it has not been successfully applied to exculpate a director.124 Had Austin J found that ASIC had made out its case in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich, then his Honour was prepared to allow Rich and Silbermann’s use of s 180(2).125 In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Mariner Corporation, Beach J was prepared to allow each of the directors access to the business judgment rule, but dismissed ASIC's case that their decision to announce an off-market bid for another entity without first securing finance was a breach of s 180(1).126 A receiver has also been allowed access to the business judgment rule, but was held not to have breached the duty of care in the exercise of their power of sale-122 There is an ever-evolving risk matrix facing companies and their directors and management. Since at least 2016, the impact of climate change on director decision-making has been a growing concern, with the perception that it was only a matter of time before an action for a breach of the duty of care and diligence in relation to failure to consider climate change risks occurred.128 There has been recent activism in this space: approximately 75 per cent of the 341 climate change disputes identified between 1986 and 2023 were commenced after 2015,!22 and Australia represents the second largest jurisdiction for such disputes after the United States of America),12° targeted litigation against directors or management in relation to their duty of care and diligence on climate risk has not yet taken place. Submissions to the fourth edition of the ASX’s Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations (‘the ASX Principles’) in 2019 acknowledged the relaSubmissions to the fourth edition of the ASX’s Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations (‘the ASX Principles’) in 2019 acknowledged the relationship between the impact of an entity on the environment and other elements of environmental risk,/3 leading to the definition of ‘environmental risk’ in the published Principles and Recommendations being broadened to include risks associated with ‘the entity polluting or degrading the environment, adding to the carbon levels in the atmosphere, or threatening a region's biodiversity or cultural heritage... [and] risks for the entity associated with climate change, reduced air quality and water scarcity’32 The consultation draft for the fifth edition of the Principles and Recommendations, released in February 2024 but not adopted, had proposed amending this definition to expand it from ‘negative’ environmental consequences and ‘adverse’ affects, to any consequence or affect of corporate activity. Although the draft amendments to the Commentary following Recommendation 7.4 identify that companies ‘may find it useful to consider their reasonably foreseeable risks, as well as their key stakeholders, when developing their reporting; it concludes that ‘[t]his Recommendation does not require climate-related financial disclosures? The draft amendments also identify the potential impact of sustainability reports, discussed in Chapter 7.40 in relation to reporting and disclosure obligations, which were introduced in 2024. These reports impose the Australian Sustainability Reporting Standards on certain corporations.132 As discussed in Chapter 10, it was announced in February 2025 that the fourth edition of the ASX Principles would remain in effect. Similarly, following the decision of Australian Securities and Investment Commission v RI Advice Group Pty Ltd,2° scrutiny has grown over corporate responsibilities in relation to cybersecurity.32 Ri Advice involved duties under s 912A of the Corporations Act—a sub-set of specialist duties requiring financial services licensees to ‘do all things necessary to ensure that the [services] are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly’ and to ‘have adequate risk management systems’ discussed in detail in Chapter 18. This decision highlights expanding judicial expectations of how a reasonable director of a company that provides a service where cyber risk is heightened should mitigate such risks. Rofe J commented: Cybersecurity risk forms a significant risk connected with the conduct of the business and provision of financial services. It is not possible to reduce cybersecurity risk to zero, but it is possible to materially reduce cybersecurity risk through adequate cybersecurity a Le nee enneenc ln Leena 139 Fo De

Honour was prepared to allow Rich and Silbermann’s use of s 180(2).!25 In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Mariner Corporation, Beach J was prepared to allow each of the directors access to the business judgment rule, but dismissed ASIC’s case that their decision to announce an Similarly, following the decision of Australian Securities and Investment Commission v RI Advice Group Pty Ltd,26 scrutiny has grown over corporate responsibilities in relation to cybersecurity.132 RI Advice involved duties under s 912A of the Corporations Act—a sub-set of specialist duties requiring financial services licensees to ‘do all things necessary to ensure that the [services] are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly’ and to ‘have adequate risk management systems’ discussed in detail in Chapter 18. This decision highlights expanding judicial expectations of how a reasonable director of a company that provides a service Cybersecurity risk forms a significant risk connected with the conduct of the business and provision of financial services. It is not possible to reduce cybersecurity risk to zero, but it is possible to materially reduce cybersecurity risk through adequate cybersecurity documentation and controls to an acceptable level.38 It is not difficult to see how an argument could be made, under the general duty of care and diligence in s 180(1), that directors who do not engage in careful consideration of their company’s risk assessment and response in relation to both cyber and climate risk, could be held in breach.32 O Loading. Please wait

In many companies, directors make decisions based upon information provided to them by other officers and employees, such as the CFO or internal auditor, in relation to the financial position of the company. This raises questions: In what circumstances may a director delegate certain responsibilities or rely on an expert opinion provided to them? When would that be considered conflicting with the core, irreducible requirement of involvement in monitoring the per- formance of the company under s 180(1) and the general law? The issue of delegation and reliance add complexity to the operation of the duty of care, skill and diligence. Prior to the enactment of the current provisions of the Corporations Act, the case law dealt with delegation and reliance as related, if not conjoined, principles and there was a degree of discordance as to directors’ ability to delegate and rely. A director's ability to reasonably rely on information provided to them by others was discussed in the AWA Ltd v Daniels litigation, and on appeal in Daniels v Anderson.“° At first instance, Rogers CJ held that[a] director is justified in trusting officers of the corporation to perform all duties that, having regard to the exigencies of business, the intelligent devotion of labour and the articles of association, may properly be left to such officers’! Further, his Honour recognised a degree of business efficacy must be incorporated into the relationship between the directors and the company as ‘the business of the corporation could not go on if directors could not trust those who are put into a position of trust for the express purpose of attending to details of management’1“2 On appeal, Clarke and Sheller JJA cited the United States Court of Appeals with approval where it stated that ‘when an investment poses an obvious risk, a director cannot rely blindly on the judgment of others‘? As a result, they rejected the CEO’s argument that he had delegated the responsibility of monitoring Koval and his foreign exchange transactions to others, and was entitled to rely upon them without providing further supervision. In Statewide Tobacco Services Ltd v Morley, Ormiston J stated that directors are entitled to delegate certain tasks but are expected to ‘take a diligent and intelligent interest in the information either available to [them], or which they might with fairness demand from the executives or other employees and agents of the company‘ Within the Corporations Act, separate provisions exist to enable delegation of some responsibilities by directors—and not officers or others—and reasonable reliance by directors on information provided to them by others. These provisions are discussed below but must be considered in light of the current stance in relation to s 180(1): that there is a core, non-delegable requirement of involvement in monitoring the performance of the company. As exemplified in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Healey, any attempt to delegate or rely which would encroach on that core involvement in monitoring will be a breach of s 180(1).142

## 11.20.05 Delegation

Many company constitutions allow the board to delegate responsibilities to a director appointed to be the managing director. This is also provided for in replaceable rule in s 198C of the Corporations Act, and the replaceable rule in s 198D that permits delegation by the directors to a committee of directors, a single director, an employee of the company, or any other person. Not only is the exercise of power by a delegate as effective as if it had been exercised by the directors,/4° but under s 190(1) the directors remain responsible for the exercise of the power by the delegate, as if the power had been exercised by the directors. Daniels v Anderson confirms that the right to delegate exists, but there remains an obligation to supervise the delegate.“2 However, there are limitations placed on that responsibility by s 190(2) so that the director will not be held responsible if: (b) the director believed: (i) on reasonable grounds; and (ii) in good faith; and (iii) after making proper inquiry if the circumstances indicated the need for inquiry that the delegate was reliable and competent in relation to the power delegated. The term ‘reasonable grounds’ and whether ‘the circumstances indicated the need for inquiry’ are not defined within the Act, and so the courts have turned to the test applied in relation to the reasonableness of delegation. In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Adler,48 Santow J distilled the principles from the general law into the following factors to determine the reasonableness of the delegation: (1) the function that has been delegated is such that ‘it may properly be left to such officers’142 IDV thn antant ta hich the af TRA RIT aT Are Hr Te rt

(5) the extent of steps taken by the director; for example, inquiries made or other circumstances engendering ‘trust’ (6) whether the position of the director is executive or non-executive152

Logically, a director who continues to be significantly engaged in the task or function that they purport to have delegated may not be able to rely on a claim of delegation to avoid liability1*4

## 11.20.10 Reliance

Under s 189 of the Corporations Act, there is a presumption that a director's reliance on information provided by employees, professional advisers or experts, other directors and officers and committees of directors is reasonable, as long as it is made in good faith and after the director has made their own independent assessment of the information or advice. The limitations to this presumption set out in s 189 are similar but not identical to the limitations in s 190(2) in relation to directors’ responsibility for the behaviour of delegates. First, the advice or information must be given by a person within the roles noted above acting within their area of expertise. The director must believe on reasonable grounds that the employee or adviser providing the information or advice is competent in that area, or that the matter is within the area of authority of the director, officer or committee. Second, the director's reliance must be made in good faith. Finally, the director must make their own independent assessment of the information or advice. This condition is qualified by an element of subjectivity, ‘having regard to the director's knowledge of the corporation and the complexity of the structure and operations of the corporation’ When proposed in 1998, the draft s 189 included the same ‘proper inquiry’ test as set out in s 190(2)155 However, when s 189 was enacted, the requirement had changed to an ‘independent assessment, subject to the director's own knowledge and the complexity of the company. This is a more subjective position than provided for in s 190(2) or the Court of Appeal in Daniels v Anderson.13* Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Macdonald (No 11)152 discussed whether the directors could delegate the drafting and settlement of the ASX announcement to another director or rely on the advice of management and outside experts. Gzell J held that this was not a question of reliance or delegation, as: [alll of the non-executive directors ... knew or should have known that if JHIL made the statements as to the sufficiency of funding of the foundation in the draft ASX announcement there was a danger that JHIL would face legal action for publishing false or misleading or deceptive statements ... ‘This was not a matter in which a director was entitled to rely upon those ... co-directors more concerned with communications strategy to consider the draft ASX announcement. ‘This was a key statement in relation to a highly significant restructure of the James Hardie group. Management having brought the matter to the board, none of them was entitled to abdicate responsibility by delegating his or her duty to a fellow director. Nor was this a case of reliance upon management, a co-director or expert adviser. Management had sought the board’s approval and the task of approving the draft ASX announcement involved no more than an understanding of the English language used in the document48 Although the Court of Appeal overturned Gzell J's finding of fact that the announcement had been approved at the meeting of 15 February 2001, their Honours expressed a similar view as Gzell J that this particular announcement was not appropriate for delegation or reliance on others: ’‘[t]hese were not circumstances in which a non-executive director, exercising due care and diligence, could accept without application of his or her mind to the draft news release before the board for its approval. ... We do not think this was an occasion of reasonable reliance on management or others/152 Equally, where professional advice is provided on the basis of assumptions that an external advisor is asked to make, which that external advisor may not be in a position to challenge, assess or verify, this may affect the validity of the directors’ reliance that advice182 Aw wrcure: wie pustwur ur ure UN eeeu 1s EAC CULE UF HUreaccuuve:

## 11.20.10 Reliance

[a]ll of the non-executive directors ... knew or should have known that if JHIL made the statements as to the sufficiency of funding of the foundation in the draft ASX announcement there was a danger that JHIL would face legal action for publishing false or misleading or deceptive statements ... In addition to the duty of care and diligence, there are two insolvency-specific duties imposed by the Corporations Act. The first is the director's duty to prevent insolvent trading in s 588G, discussed in Section 11.25.05. Section 588G creates a duty on directors not to continue trading if the company is insolvent and provides that a director who fails to do so can be personally liable for the debts incurred if, at the time, there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that the company was or would become insolvent, and the director was or should have been aware of those grounds. The imposition of personal liability on directors in limited companies is an example of piercing the corporate veil. A similar duty is imposed on a holding company to prevent insolvent trading in a subsidiary under s 588V. The second duty is one of the anti-phoenixing provisions introduced in 2020.12 Phoenixing is an illegal practice where ‘a new company, for little or no value, continues the business of an existing company that has been liquidated or otherwise abandoned to avoid paying outstanding debts; including taxes and employee entitlements. Acommon step within the phoenixing process is for assets of the old company to be transferred to the new company at less than true or market value— meaning that once the old company enters liquidation, there are no assets from which to pay the remaining creditors. Sections 588GAA-GAC create offences in relation to such ‘creditor-defeating disposition’ of company property, which will be discussed further below.

## 11.25.05 Section 588G

Section 588G of the Corporation Act obliges a director to prevent the company from incurring debts if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that it is insolvent. This provision narrowed the focus of previous provisions. which applied more widely to persons taking part in the management of the company. By contrast, s 588G applies only to directors. Claims for breach of this obligation can be prompted by a liquidator’s report (s 533), or following investigation by anew board, from a creditor, or from ASIC taking legal action where it can be shown that a company failed to keep adequate financial records.15 There are five elements to be satisfied before insolvent trading has occurred: (1) the defendant was a director at the time when the company incurred the debt (2) the company was insolvent at that time (3) there were reasonable grounds for suspecting insolvency (4) the debt must have been incurred on or after the commencement of this Act!®© (5) the director failed to prevent the company incurring the debt.

The first four conditions form part of s 588G(1), and the final condition is contained in s 588G(2), which is a civil penalty provision“ If the failure to prevent the company from incurring the debt is dishonest, then that is a criminal offence1® The first condition is that the defendant must be a director at the time the company incurred the debt. Unlike other directors’ duties, liability under s 588G is limited to directors. This includes de facto and shadow directors as defined in s 9 of the Corporations Act and discussed in Chapter 10 at Sections 10.20.05-10 but excludes other officers and employees. The second condition is that the company must be insolvent at the time the debt is incurred or become insolvent due to incurring that debt. This is the first of three references to insolvency within s 588G. Discussed in more detail in Section 15.10, solvency is defined in s 95A as the ability to pay all of the company’s debts as and when they become due and payable. A company that is not solvent is insolvent under s 95A(2). According to Owen J in Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9):162 [c]ommercial reality dictates that the assessment of available funds is not confined to the company’s cash resources. It is legitimate to take into account funds the company can, on a real and reasoned view, realise by sale of assets, borrowing against the security of its assets, or by other reasonable means. It is more appropriate to consider a cash flow test for determining insolvency under s 95A, rather than a balance sheet test. Solvency or insolvency is‘a question of fact, which falls to be decided as a matter of commercial reality in light of all the circumstances’122 The third condition—that there are ‘reasonable grounds for suspecting that the company is insolvent’/—was introduced on the basis of recommendations

## 11.25.05 Section 588G

Section 588G of the Corporation Act obliges a director to prevent the company from incurring debts if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that it is insolvent. This provision narrowed the focus of previous provisions,“ which applied more widely to persons taking part in the management of the company. By contrast, s 588G applies only to directors. Claims for breach of this obligation can be prompted by a liquidator’s report (s 533), or following investigation by a new board, from a creditor, or from ASIC taking legal action where it can be shown that a company failed to keep adequate financial records.16> There are five elements to be satisfied before insolvent trading has occurred:

It is more appropriate to consider a cash flow test for determining insolvency under s 95A, rather than a balance sheet test. Solvency or insolvency is‘a question of fact, which falls to be decided as a matter of commercial reality in light of all the circumstances’122 The third condition—that there are ‘reasonable grounds for suspecting that the company is insolvent’—was introduced on the basis of recommendations made in the 1988 Harmer Report22! This change from ‘expect’ in the previous Act to ‘suspect’ in s 588G did not flow on to the defence under s 588H, which will be discussed below. Einfeld J considered the interpretation of the threshold for ‘suspecting insolvency’ in Metropolitan Fire Systems Pty Ltd v Miller, and 122 and not ‘the particular director whose conduct is under scrutiny’122 The element of ‘suspicion’ requires more than‘a mere idle wondering ... it is a positive feeling noted that regardless of the language used, it was an objective test, to be ‘judged by the standard appropriate to a director of ordinary competenc of actual apprehension or mistrust, amounting to“a slight opinion, but without sufficient evidence” ... Consequently, a reason to suspect that a fact exists is “174 more than a reason to consider or look into the possibility of its existence/14 The fourth condition is that the company incurs a debt at a time after the commencement of this provision and relates to the second condition requiring the company to be insolvent at the time the debt is incurred or become insolvent by incurring that debt. Section 588G(1A) lists a number of actions and provides a specific time for the incurring of a debt for each particular action, including paying a dividend, making a reduction of share capital, buying back shares, redeeming redeemable preference shares at its own option, issuing redeemable preference shares redeemed other than at its own option, providing financial assistance to purchase its shares, and entering into an uncommercial transaction under s 588FB. Section 588F provides that deductions made by a company The third condition—that there are ‘reasonable grounds for suspecting that the company is insolvent’/—was introduced on the basis of recommendations made in the 1988 Harmer Report! This change from ‘expect’ in the previous Act to ‘suspect’ in s 588G did not flow on to the defence under s 588H, which will be discussed below. Einfeld J considered the interpretation of the threshold for ‘suspecting insolvency’ in Metropolitan Fire Systems Pty Ltd v Miller, and noted that regardless of the language used, it was an objective test, to be ‘judged by the standard appropriate to a director of ordinary competence! and not ‘the particular director whose conduct is under scrutiny’ The element of ‘suspicion’ requires more than‘a mere idle wondering ... it is a positive feeling of actual apprehension or mistrust, amounting to “a slight opinion, but without sufficient evidence” ... Consequently, a reason to suspect that a fact exists is more than a reason to consider or look into the possibility of its existence/14 The fourth condition is that the company incurs a debt at a time after the commencement of this provision and relates to the second condition requiring the company to be insolvent at the time the debt is incurred or become insolvent by incurring that debt. Section 588G(1A) lists a number of actions and provides a specific time for the incurring of a debt for each particular action, including paying a dividend, making a reduction of share capital, buying back shares, redeeming redeemable preference shares at its own option, issuing redeemable preference shares redeemed other than at its own option, providing financial assistance to purchase its shares, and entering into an uncommercial transaction under s 588FB. Section 588F provides that deductions made by a company that must be passed on to the Commissioner of Taxation under the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (Cth) are incurred at the time when the deduction is made. Outside of those specific examples, the meaning of ‘incurring a debt’ must be determined in case law. In considering debts under s 588G, the courts have taken a narrow construction excluding; for example, liquidated damages that a company is liable for in relation to providing misleading information. Liability under a guarantee may be a debt, despite being contingent in nature until a demand for payment is made. If the guarantee relates to performance by another, then a failure by that party to perform will lead to a claim for damages, rather than a debt. However, if the guarantee is for payment of a debt by another, then that is still considered a debt26 Early instances of liability were determined by the courts on the basis of voluntariness, with sales tax excluded from consideration as a debt as the company did not create that liability voluntarily but payroll tax being included as a debt voluntarily incurred from the company’s decision to employ.22 However, more recent cases have held that the provision does not require an element of choice into the incurring of the liability for it to be considered a debt.122 In addition to the earlier references to insolvency, the final condition contained in s 588G(2) relates to insolvency. A director will contravene s 588G(2) by failing to prevent the company from incurring a debt if they knew at the time the debt was incurred that there were grounds for suspecting that the company was insolvent, or would become insolvent by incurring that debt, or if a reasonable director, in a‘like position in a company in the company’s circumstances, would be so aware. This objective standard of a reasonable director has been held to be a director of ordinary competence with the ability to have a basic understanding of the company’s financial status.12 As such, if a director is aware of grounds to suspect insolvency, or a reasonable director in their position would be so aware, and they do not’take all reasonable steps to prevent the company from incurring the debt’1£! then they will have breached s 588G(2).

## 11.25.10 Section 588GA

Similar to the business judgment rule in s 180(2), which exculpates directors who have made informed business decisions from being found in breach of the duty of care, skill and diligence, s 588GA provides a‘safe harbour’ for directors from personal liability for debts incurred while developing ‘courses of action that are reasonably likely to lead to a better outcome for the company’. Section 588GA(1) states that the duty in s 588G(2) does not apply to a director in relation to a debt, if: (a) at a particular time after the person starts to suspect the company may become or be insolvent, the person starts developing one or more courses of action that are reasonably likely to lead to a better outcome for the company; and Aya an.
eas

## 11.25.10 Section 588GA

(b) the debt is incurred directly or indirectly in connection with any such course of action There are time limits on the safe harbour to prevent it from extending unreasonably.182 When determining whether or not a course of action is likely to lead to a better outcome for the company, s 588G(2) provides that regard may be had to whether the director is: properly informing themselves of the company’s financial position; taking appropriate steps to prevent misconduct by officers or employees; ensuring that the company keeps appropriate financial records; obtaining advice from appropriate qualified sources who have been given sufficient information; or developing or implementing a plan for restructure to improve the financial position. Section 588GA(3) confirms that the burden of proving that the debts incurred fall within the safe harbour falls upon the director seeking to rely ons 588GA(1). Only those debts incurred in relation to the ‘courses of action’ will fall within the safe harbour. The safe harbour will not be available to a director of a company that has failed to pay the entitlements of its employees by the time they fall due, or has not complied with its taxation reporting obligations.122 Under s 588WA, a similar safe harbour will protect a holding company against a claim of insolvent trading under s 588V, provided that the holding company takes reasonable steps to ensure that the safe harbour applies to the directors and the debt of the subsidiary. However, it will be important for directors of subsidiary companies to take care that the course of action developed will benefit the insolvent subsidiary in order for the debts incurred to be protected under the safe harbour, rather than benefitting the holding company or the company group. Section 588GA was introduced to encourage ‘cultural change; providing an incentive for directors to remain in control of a struggling company and to take reasonable risks to facilitate restructure and rescue, rather than placing the company ‘prematurely’ into voluntary administration or liquidation.“&4 Whether this provision will be sufficient to effect that change is as yet unclear, and at the time of writing there are yet to be any significant decisions on the substance of s 588GA.185 Interestingly, under s 588HA, an independent review of the impact of this provision on the conduct of directors, and the interests of creditors and employees, must be undertaken to determine whether the safe harbour is achieving its aims. The review concluded that greater education and guidance to support the operation of these provisions was necessary, to promote awareness of them, but that the provisions themselves ‘offer considerable assistance in encouraging an active turnaround market‘186

## 11.25.15 Section 588H
There are four defences under s 588H available to directors who have contravened s 588G(2):182 (1) that there were reasonable grounds to expect solvency (2) that the director placed reasonable reliance on information as to solvency provided by others (3) that the director was ill or had other good reasons not to participate in management at the time when the debt was incurred (4) that the director took all reasonable steps to prevent the company from incurring the debt. Although s 588G requires reasonable grounds for suspecting insolvency, ss 588H(2)-(3) retains the former language of ‘expecting’ solvency. The distinction between reasonable grounds to ‘suspect’ and ‘expect’ insolvency was discussed in Metropolitan Fire Systems Pty Ltd v Miller, with Einfeld J considering that the threshold of knowledge or awareness to ‘suspect’ was lower than to ‘expect’: [t]he expectation must be differentiated from mere hope in order to satisfy this defence. It implies a measure of confidence that the company is solvent/1£8 The interaction between these defences and the prior proof in s 588G that there were reasonable grounds to suspect insolvency is fraught, as an expectation of solvency is arguably the higher threshold. These two defences were unsuccessfully argued in Re McLellan,82 the facts of which are set out in Chapter 10 at Section 10.40.10. Mr Carroll was a director, who had taken active steps to obtain advice and monitored stock levels and daily production. Carroll obtained advice from an accountant, Mr Bright, and was told that the company was close to being insolvent. An insolvency practitioner also advised Carroll that the company could survive with further investment. The continued advice to Carroll from Bright was that the company had cash flow issues but was not yet insolvent. Goldberg J was not satisfied that this amounted to the requirements in ss 588H(2) or (3). In relation to s 588H(2), Goldberg J noted that ‘the fact that Mr Carroll may have had a “suspicion” of insolvency does not answer the question whether he had an “expectation” that the Company was solvent throughout the relevant period’1®° His Honour then turned to a staged inquiry, as set out in Hall v Poolman,!2! where Palmer J asked: How sure are we that this asset can be turned into cash to pay all our debts, present and to be incurred, within 3 months? Is that outcome certain, probable, more likely than not, possible, possible with a bit of luck, possible with a lot of luck, remote, or is there no way of knowing?! Goldberg J in McLellan held that a director can have a reasonable expectation of solvency only if their honest and reasonable answer is that the asset can certainly or probably be turned into cash to pay all the company’s debts present and to be incurred within three months.1%2 His Honour was prepared to find that, although Carroll knew throughout the relevant period that the company was not paying its debts as and when they fell due, the full answer on ‘reasonable grounds to suspect solvency’ depended on both a reliance on the inventory of stock and communications with Bright In terms of the stock, although there was substantial stock on hand which was saleable, the extent of outstanding and accruing debts was such that Goldberg J was not prepared to find it reasonable for Carroll to expect the stock to be sold within a sufficiently short timeframe to satisfy the Hall v Poolman inquiry, and as such s 588H(2) was not satisfied.15 In relation to Carroll’s argument under s 588H(3), Goldberg J found that, although the advice had been provided by an accountant and Carroll had relied on it, it was not provided within the terms of s 588H(3)(a)(i); namely, a competent and reliable person responsible for providing adequate advice as to the solvency of the company. Bright (the accountant) was engaged by the company for the purpose of giving business advice regarding cashflows, costs and expenses, and an analysis of the business model profits and losses. Although Bright was a competent and reliable person, the Court found that the retainer was not specifically for the provision of advice as to solvency in the relevant period.% On this point, in Newman v Hartwig, Matthews J articulated clearly a distinction between the role of the external accountant, who is not responsible for the company’s bookkeeping, management accounts or monthly reports, and an advisor retained for the purposes of providing advice about solvency. ‘It cannot be the case that an external accountant’s responsibility for preparing the annual financial statement after the end of the financial year equates to that accountant being responsible for providing adequate information about whether the company was solvent at any point during the course of that financial year’! It may be necessary, then, for the directors or company to retain a qualified and competent person specifically for the purpose of obtaining advice as to solvency, and that requesting that information from their usual financial advisor may not be sufficient. If a director has breached their common law, equitable or statutory directors’ duties, they will not be able to utilise the defences under s 588H, in particular s 588H(4). The policy behind s 588H(4) has been influenced by the statement in the Harmer Report that: ‘it is not appropriate for a provision designed to establish a proper standard of conduct by directors to impose liability on a director who was not in a position to influence the management of the financial affairs of the company at the relevant time’18 Only those directors who are unable to participate and influence management at the relevant time for proper reasons will be able to utilise this defence. For example, in Tourprint International Pty Ltd (in liq) v Bott, a director who had joined the board of the insolvent company less than a year before it entered into voluntary administration was not permitted to utilise either ss 588H(2) or (4) as he had failed to engage in an active role within the financial management of the company.!22 Mr Bott's argument for non-participation centred on him being excluded from management and deceived by the other directors of the company. Although the Court accepted that Bott had been deceived by one of the other directors,2% ‘failure to have a more active role in management is not referrable to any reason which is a“good reason’ for the purposes of s 588H(4).201 Finally, in relation to the defence that a director took all reasonable steps to prevent the company from incurring a debt, according to s 588H(6), regard will be had to steps taken to appoint an administrator and the timing and result of such actions.

## 11.25.20 Section 588GAB

Section 588GAB prohibits officers from engaging in conduct that would result in the company making a creditor-defeating disposition if the company is insolvent, would become insolvent because of that disposition or other dispositions at that time, or less than 12 months after the disposition the company either enters into external administration or ceases to carry on business altogether as a direct or indirect result of the disposition.2° This provision is designed to respond to circumstances where company property is transferred out of company control, either for under-value or for no value, which commonly occurs during illegal phoenixing. The prohibition is both a criminal offence in s 588GAB(1), where recklessness is the fault element; and a civil penalty offence in s 588GAB(2), where the officer knew, or a reasonable person in the position of the officer would know, that the disposition is a creditor-defeating disposition. Acreditor-defeating disposition’ is defined in s 588FDB as having two elements. The first relates to value: the consideration for the property disposition must be less than the lower of either the market value of the property, or the best price that was reasonably obtainable for the property in the circumstances. The second relates to the effect on a subsequent external administration of the original company: the disposition must have the effect of either preventing the property from being available for the benefit of the creditors during an external administration or hindering or significantly delaying the process of making that property available for the benefit of the creditors via external administration. Section 588FDA(3) specifically extends the concept of ‘disposition’ to include a third party, who is not the recipient of the property, but receives some or all of the consideration for the disposition from that recipient.

## 11.25.20 Section 588GAB

In addition to this prohibition on officers in s S88GAB, s 588GAC(1) makes it an offence for a person to procure, incite, or encourage a company to make a creditor-defeating disposition when the company is insolvent, becomes insolvent due to that disposition or dispositions made at the time, or the company either is placed into external administration or ceases to do business altogether due to the disposition, within 12 months of the disposition being made. Recklessness is again the fault element for this offence. As is the case with s 588GAB, s 588GAC(2) creates a civil penalty provision mirroring the offence ins 588GAC(1), where the person knows, or a reasonable person in the position of that person would know, that the disposition is a creditor-defeating disposition. Exceptions are provided in both provisions for external administration processes, or court-ordered compromises and arrangements.22
## 11.25.25 Consequences for breach

Section 588G is a civil penalty provision.2% Should the director be found to have acted dishonestly during the incurring of the debt, they are guilty of an offence under s 588G(3), with a maximum penalty of 2,000 penalty units ($626,000) and/or five years imprisonment.2% Additionally, where an application for a civil penalty has been made, a director may be liable to compensate the company for loss or damage (s 588J(1)) or where criminal proceedings are brought (s 588K). This compensation is paid to the company, although the extent of the compensation is determined by the loss of damage to the creditor. A liquidator is also permitted to recover for loss or damage caused to the company under s 588M, which is generally the value of the unsecured debts incurred through the insolvent trading.2°° A creditor may also apply under ss 588R-U, with the permission of the liquidator or through leave of the court, to recover loss or damage in relation to a wholly or partly unsecured debt incurred in breach of s 588G (s 588M(3)). There is a six-year limitation on such actions 2% joined the board of the insolvent company less than a year before it entered into voluntary administration was not permitted to utilise either ss 588H(2) or (4) as he had failed to engage in an active role within the financial management of the company.!%2 Mr Bott's argument for non-participation centred on him being excluded from management and deceived by the other directors of the company. Although the Court accepted that Bott had been deceived by one of the other directors,2% ‘failure to have a more active role in management is not referrable to any reason which is a“good reason’ for the purposes of s 588H(4):201

## 11.25.20 Section 588GAB

Exceptions are provided in both provisions for external administration processes, or court-ordered compromises and arrangements.22

## 11.25.25 Consequences for breach

This chapter began by considering the history behind the common law and equitable directors’ duties of care, skill and diligence, before considering how those duties were translated into statute. It is clear from that discussion that there has been significant movement in the duty of care, skill and diligence over the past 100 years—from a subjective duty, requiring very little from directors who were not actively engaged with their company, to the modern, more objective standard. At common law and in equity, there is a core of non-reducible skills, requiring the director to place themselves in a position to guide and monitor the company. Further, if the director holds themselves out as having some particular skill on appointment, they will be expected to employ that skill in performance of their duties. However, the duty is not entirely objective, as the director’s behaviour will be considered against that of a reasonable director, in the director's position, in a company of the same kind as this particular director. This development, from purely subjective to mostly objective, is visible in the modern enactment of the duty in s 180(1). The duty under s 180(1) is objective but is tempered by the subjective circumstances of the particular director and company concerned. Further, consideration of the necessities of corporate risktaking and entrepreneurialism resulted in the business judgment rule in s 180(2). Although it has been more than two decades since enactment of this provision, it remains unclear whether the business judgment rule should be operating as a presumption or a defence. This chapter concludes with consideration of the specific duties arising in insolvency: the director's duty to prevent insolvent trading in s 588G, and the officers duty to prevent creditor-defeating dispositions. Recent reforms to this part of the Corporations Act aim to incentivise directors to remain in control of companies at risk of insolvency by providing a safe harbour for particular debts, but the practical impact of these provisions cannot yet be determined. The next chapter will consider the first duty aligned with the theme of loyalty and good faith: the duty to act in good faith in the best interests of the compa- ny and for proper purposes. 1 Historically, the duty of care, skill and diligence has been considered a necessary incident to the director's fiduciary position. It is more appropriate in light of the development of fiduciary law within Australia to recognise this duty as equitable in nature, rather than strictly fiduciary: Permanent Building Society (in liq) v Wheeler (1994) 11 WAR 187. Detailed consideration of the director's fiduciary obligation can be found in Chapter 13. For further consideration of Permanent Building Society (in liq) v Wheeler, see JD Heydon, MJ Leeming and PG Turner, Meagher, Gummow and Lehane's Equity: Doctrines and Remedies (LexisNexis Butterworths, 5th ed, 2015) 200-10, [5-325]-5-375]. 2 Non-executive directors may also have a contract of service with the company which imposes this same duty of care. It will be implied if it does not expressly exist. 2 Re Cardiff Savings Bank [1892] 2 Ch 100. 4 Ibid 108. 3 Ibid 102.

Ee a. ad N fe ia: 109. 8 Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Ltd [1925] Ch 407.

2 Ibid 428.
+ Ibid.
1 Ibid 429. 12 Statewide Tobacco Services Ltd v Morley (1990) 2 ACSR 405; Morley v Statewide Tobacco Services Ltd [1993] 1 VR 423; Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Friedrich (1991) 5 ACSR 115. 13 Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Friedrich (1991) 5 ACSR 115, 187.

14 Working Group, Australian Merchant Bankers Association, Corporate Practices and Conduct (Report, 1991) (‘the Bosch Report’). Two further reports from the same Working Group were issued in 1993 and 1995—also referred to as‘the Bosch Reports'—which can lead to some confusion as all deal with corporate governance: Working Group, Australian Institute of Company Directors, Corporate Practices and Conduct (Report, 2nd ed, 1993); Working Group, Australian Institute of Company Directors, Corporate Practices and Conduct (Report, 3rd ed, 1995). 15 Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance, Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance (Report, 1 December 1992) (‘the Cadbury Report’). 18 AWA Ltd v Daniels (1992) 7 ACSR 759. 42 Daniels v Anderson (1995) 37 NSWLR 438.

18 AWA Ltd v Daniels (1992) 7 ACSR 759, 864, 870. The statutory provision at the time was Companies Code s 299(2). 12 Ibid 864, citing Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Friedrich (1991) 5 ACSR 115, 187. 20 bid 864-5. 21 Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Ltd [1925] Ch 407. 22 AWA Ltd v Daniels (1992) 7 ACSR 759, 866, 868.

23 The definitions of executive and non-executive director are considered in Chapter 10 at Section 10.20.15. 24 AWA Ltd v Daniels (1992) 7 ACSR 759, 868. 25 (1995) 37 NSWLR 438.
by § Ibid 500. N 7 Ibid 500-1.
ie Ibi
i 502.
ty ® Ibid 503.

39 See, eg, Vrisakis v Australian Securities Commission (1993) 9 WAR 395. 31 Explanatory Memorandum, Corporate Law Reform Bill 1992 (Cth) [84]-(85]. 32:Directors’ Duties and Corporate Governance: Facilitating Innovations and Protecting Investors’ (Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Paper No 3, The Treasury, 1997) [6.2] <https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-03/full-13,pdf>. 33 Daniels v Anderson (1995) 37 NSWLR 438, 501.
