# Chapter 6 Corporate contracting

6.05 Introduction 6.10 Companies entering contracts directly 6.15 Companies entering contracts via agents

## 6.15.05 Actual and implied actual authority
6.20 Apparent authority

## 6.20.05 Acquiescence
6.25 The effect of non-compliance with internal matters on the validity of a contract

## 6.25.05 The statutory assumptions 6.30 Authority by ratification 6.35 Pre-incorporation contracts 6.40 Summary

So far, we have established what a company is (Chapter 3), how a company is created (Chapter 4), and what rules govern a company’s internal operations (Chapter 5). This chapter discusses the legal capacity of a company to enter contracts. We discuss how companies enter contracts through agents and the statutory assumptions that protect third parties when dealing with companies. We also discuss pre-incorporation contracts. There are several competing policy issues in this area of law. It is important that companies can enter contracts easily and be bound by their obligations. It is also important that third parties are not prejudiced if the internal requirements of a company, in terms of capacity or authority to act as the company, are not complied with. Both the law of contract and the Corporations Act seek to balance these issues, sometimes in interesting ways. It is useful to keep these policy perspectives in mind when studying this area of law. Under s 124 of the Corporations Act, a company has the legal capacity and powers of an individual. This means that, from the time the company is registered, it can enter contracts in its own right. There are two ways in which a company can enter a contract: directly or through an agent. To enter a contract directly, the common seal of a company must be used on the contract and the contract signed in accordance with the requirements of s 127(2), or the contract must be signed by two directors or by a director and company secretary in accordance with s 127(1). A common seal is a rubber stamp with the company’s name and Australian Company Number (ACN) on it. Prior to 1998, companies were required to have a common seal. Now, under s 123, a company may choose whether to have a seal or not! If a common seal is used on a document, s 127(2) requires that it must be signed by two directors or by one director and the company secretary. In a proprietary company with a single director, where that person is also the company secretary, that director can witness the use of the common seal? The advantage of a contract being entered into using the common seal is that this counts as a direct act of the company, with the common seal acting like the company’s signature. As stated by Mason CJ in Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General:3 ‘The affixing of the seal to an instrument makes the instrument that of the company itself; the affixing of the seal is in that sense a corporate act, having effect similar to a signature by an individual ... Thus, it may be said that a contract executed under the common. seal evidences the assent of the corporation itself and such a contract is to be distinguished from one made by a director or officer on behalf of the company, being a contract made by an agent on behalf of the company as principal4 The disadvantage is that many companies today do not have a common seal, or if they do it is not often used. In these instances, the only way a company can directly enter a contract is by complying with s 127(1). As stated above, s 127(1) provides that a company can execute a document directly without using a common seal if the document is signed by two directors or by a director and a company secretary. Under s 204A(1), a public company is required to have a company secretary but a proprietary company does not have this requirement. In a single director company, where that person is also the company secretary, or the only shareholder, that director can sign contracts alone. In all of these instances, the company is taken to have entered the contract directly, provided that the requirements of s 127 are complied with. In 2022, the Corporations Act was amended to allow for electronic execution of documents. Section 110A(2) permits the execution of documents (including contracts and deeds) by a person signing an electronic form of the document provided that: (a) the method used to sign identifies the person and indicates the person's intention in respect of the information recorded in the document; and (b) the method is either: (i) as reliable as appropriate for the purpose for which the information was recorded, in light of all the circumstances, including any relevant agreement; or (ii) proven in fact to have fulfilled the functions described in paragraph (a), by itself or together with further evidence. Section 110A(4) allows for’split executions’ of documents, meaning that a person is not required to sign the same form, sign the same page or use the same method as another person. Under s 127(2A), where a company executes a document with a common seal, remote witnessing of the fixing of the seal is permitted where: (a) the person observes, by electronic means, the fixing of the seal; (b) the person signs the document (or a copy of the document); and (c) the document includes a statement that the person observed the fixing of the seal by electronic means. Sometimes, situations can arise when a document appears to have been validly executed by a company under s 127, but in reality:

* one of the parties who signed the document was not validly appointed,
* there was an internal error of company procedure in signing the document, or
* aperson who signed was committing fraud or forgery.

These situations raise the question of whether a third party should be affected by such irregularities and whether the contract is still enforceable against the pamnani Cactinne 190 O.nf tha Carnaratinne Act dieciicend at Cactinn 626 NE daaliaith thaes icctine seal evidences the assent of the corporation itself and such a contract is to be distinguished from one made by a director or officer on behalf of the company, being a contract made by an agent on behalf of the company as principal.4

* one of the parties who signed the document was not validly appointed,
* there was an internal error of company procedure in signing the document, or * aperson who signed was committing fraud or forgery.

These situations raise the question of whether a third party should be affected by such irregularities and whether the contract is still enforceable against the company. Sections 128-9 of the Corporations Act, discussed at Section 6.25.05 deal with these issues. These sections of the Act were introduced in 1984 to protect third parties where internal requirements were not followed, or a person signs a document did not have authority or was acting fraudulently. Prior to these sections being enacted, companies and third parties had to rely on the common law ‘indoor management rule, discussed at Section 6.25, to determine liability under the contract. While this common law rule still exists, its application has been substantially reduced by the introduction of ss 128-9. In practice, many company contracts are entered into by persons who work for or manage a company. These contracts can still be binding on the company under the general law of agency which recognises that one party—a principal—can enter a contract with a third party, where the contract is negotiated and concluded by an agent acting on behalf of the principal. In the corporate context, the principal is the company, and the agent is usually a manager or employee acting with authority on the company’s behalf. Provided that an agent acts within their authority, any contract entered into for the company will be binding on the company and the third party. The key issue in this context is the source and extent of the agent's authority. A contract is only binding on a company is entered into by an agent with actual or implied authority to act for the company and to enter the particular contract, or if there has been a representation or holding out by the company that the agent has authority to enter the contract (apparent or ‘ostensible’ authority). To determine if an agent has authority to act for a company, the common law rules of agency apply. Before discussing these rules, it is important to remember that the principal in these cases is the company, represented either by the board of directors or by a person acting with delegated power to manage the company. A single director generally does not have authority to act as the company unless they are given authority to do so; for example, in a sole director company or with a managing director2 The fact that companies commonly enter contracts through agents can create problems for both companies and third parties, particularly where an agent enters a contract on behalf of a company without the appropriate authority to do so. For example, a manager may be given authority to enter contracts up to a particular monetary amount. If they enter a contract over that amount, the company may not wish to be bound by the contract. This situation raises two. competing positions. On the one hand, companies should not be allowed to avoid contracts by arguing that their agent lacked authority. On the other hand, where an agent acts beyond their authority, the company and its shareholders may be prejudiced if the company is held to the contract. While agency law may find the agent liable for acting outside their authority, in practice the key issue before the courts will be which of the two parties (the company or the third party) should bear the cost of the contract. As discussed below, a central issue in these cases will usually be deciding exactly what is covered by the agent's authority.

## 6.15.05 Actual and implied actual authority

The clearest situation for determining an agent's authority is where it is expressly granted. This is called ‘actual authority’ Under s 126, a company is bound by a contract entered into by an agent with actual authority to bind the company. For example, an employee may be given express authority to negotiate a contract with a supplier to purchase a new computer. In this case, the existence and extent of the agent's actual authority is determined by looking at the terms of the agreement between the company and the agent. The agreement may be written or verbal, or implied from the circumstances, and the ordinary principles of contract will apply to determine the scope of such an agreement. Examples of written agreements conferring actual authority can include provisions in the constitution authorising a manager to enter contracts up to a specified amount, or an employment contract conferring specific powers on an employee. In large companies, the systems of delegating authority can be complex, as recognised by Barrett J in Vero Insurance Ltd v Kassem:!2 Most large companies have in place well documented systems of delegations to officers of different ranks. Internal delegations are often accompanied by powers of attorney executed under common seal embodying, by way of safeguard, limitations and requirements for multiple signatures and sometimes allowing sub-delegations. Arrangements of that kind give those companies a ready and convenient means of proving the authority of officers on any occasion on which it becomes necessary or desirable to do so, particularly in a legal context! While actual authority arises from express agreement, implied actual authority arises by implication from the circumstances. For example, under the replaceable rules in ss 201J and 198C, the board may appoint a managing director and grant that person such powers and authority as it sees fit. In such a situation, the granting of actual authority to the managing director also gives them implied actual authority to do all things incidental to their express powers. Similarly, under s 198D, the directors may delegate any of their powers to a committee of directors, a single director, an employee or any other person (unless the constitution provides otherwise). In delegating power directly, the board is also taken to have granted implied actual authority to do all actions necessary to give effect to the actual authority. Implied actual authority of a managing director
the cost of the contract. As discussed below, a central issue in these cases will usually be deciding exactly what is covered by the agent's authority.
## 6.15.05 Actual and implied actual authority Implied actual authority of a managing director

Being appointed to a role can also give rise to implied actual authority. As explained by Lord Denning in Hely-Hutchinson v Brayhead Ltd, it is implied that a person appointed to a role (such as manager) has the authority necessary to enter contracts that are common or customary in such a role:!2 [Actual authority] is express when it is given by express words, such as when a board of directors pass a resolution which authorises two of their number to sign cheques. It is implied when it is inferred from the conduct of the parties and the circumstances of the case, such as when the board of directors appoint one of their number to be managing director. They thereby impliedly authorise him [sic] to do all such things as fall within the usual scope of that office13 Amanaging director is generally taken to have implied authority to enter contracts necessary for the day-to-day running of the company. In Entwells Pty Ltdv National and General Insurance Co Ltd, |pp JA noted that a managing director's usual task is to ‘deal with every day matters, to supervise the daily running of the company, to supervise the other managers, and indeed, generally, be in charge of the business of the company’!4 Subject to the particular type and size of the company involved, a managing director is not impliedly authorised to give security or guarantees, or borrow money to finance the company outside of the ordinary course of business.1 Further, it will usually be implied that a managing director can authorise agents to make all the contracts that the managing director can make.1& Implied authority of a company secretary

The role of a company secretary varies depending upon the size and nature of a company. Although, under s 204A(1), a proprietary company does not need to have a company secretary, if it does that person will be an officer of the company.12 The general function of a company secretary is to ensure the company complies with its statutory obligations, including maintaining the company registers, lodging company returns with ASIC, and organising director and member meetings as required by the Corporations Act. In many organisations, a company secretary also plays a role in supporting the effectiveness of the board and its committees.18 Implied actual authority of a managing director Implied authority of a company secretary This can include:
advising the board and its committees on governance matters monitoring that board and committee policy and procedures are followed coordinating the timely completion and dispatch of board and committee papers ensuring that the business at board and committee meetings is accurately captured in the minutes, and helping to organise and facilitate the induction and professional development of directors.12 The role of the company secretary carries implied authority to enter into contracts related to the administration of the company but does not generally include managerial authority unless this has been conferred.2° The courts have taken a wide view of what administrative matters a company secretary has authority over. For example, in Panorama Developments (Guildford) Ltd v Fidelis Furnishing Fabrics Ltd the Court held that a company secretary had implied authority to enter contracts to hire cars. The company secretary of Fidelis had, without authority, hired luxury cars from Panorama on the basis that the cars were needed to carry the company’s important customers. Instead, the company secretary used the cars for his own private purposes. The Court held that hiring cars was within the general authority of a company secretary. Lord Denning MR noted that the company secretary: is an officer of the company with extensive duties and responsibilities ... He [sic] is no longer a mere clerk. He regularly makes representations on behalf of the company and enters into contacts on its behalf which come within the day-to-day running of the company’s business ... He is certainly entitled to sign contracts connected with the administrative side of a company’s affairs, such as employing staff, and ordering cars, and so forth.22 In Club Flotilla (Pacific Palms) Ltd v Isherwood? the Court held that a company secretary's role did not include substantive matters such as conducting litigation. Implied actual authority of a single director This can include: Implied actual authority of a single director

The role of a director does not include implied authority to bind the company. As stated by Dawson J in Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General:24 ‘The position of director does not carry with it an ostensible authority to act on behalf of the company. Directors can act only collectively as a board and the function of an individual director is to participate in decisions of the board.7* As most people dealing with companies will not be aware of the extent of an agent's authority, the law on ‘apparent authority’ has developed to protect third parties who reply upon a representation made by a company that an agent has authority. The rules on apparent authority derive from estoppel. Unlike actual authority, which involves looking for an agreement between the parties that gives rise to an actual or implied grant of authority, apparent authority arises where there has been a representation or holding out by the company that a person is its agent or has authority to enter into a particular contract. Where a company allows (by act or omission) a person to appear as if they are an agent, it will later be estopped from arguing otherwise. Apparent authority relies on a representation of authority being made to a third party, and the third party depends upon that representation in entering the contract. As discussed below, sometimes an argument of implied actual authority and apparent authority will both be available on the facts. However, it is important to remember that the nature of the inquiry into an agent's authority is different. This is because actual authority arises from an agreement between the parties (company and agent) and apparent authority arises from an appearance of authority, or a representation made to a third party. As Lord Diplock stated in Freeman & Lockyer v Buckhurst Park Properties (Mangal) Ltd: Actual authority and apparent authority are quite independent of one another. Generally they co-exist and coincide, but either may exist without the other and their respective scopes are different ... An ‘actual’ authority is a legal relationship between principal and agent created by a consensual agreement to which they alone are parties. Its scope is to be ascertained by applying ordinary principles of construction of contracts ... An ‘apparent or ‘ostensible’ authority, on the other hand, is a legal relationship between the principal and the contractor created by a representation, made by the principal to the contractor, intended to be and in fact acted upon by the contractor, that the agent has authority to enter on behalf of the principal into a contract of a kind within the scope of the ‘apparent’ authority, so as to render the principal liable to perform any obligations imposed ... by such contract.2& Freeman & Lockyer demonstrates the challenges the courts can face when deciding if a company should be bound by the acts of an agent acting without authority. The facts in this case involved one party, Kapoor, entering a contract to purchase a property (Buckhurst Park Estates) and then joining with another party, Hoon, to establish a company (Buckhurst Park Properties) (‘Buckhurst’) to complete the purchase and on-sell the property. Kapoor, Hoon and their nominees were the directors of the company. Kapoor was responsible for paying the expenses of the company and was entitled to repayment from the funds of the sale. Kapoor engaged a firm of architects, Freeman & Lockyer, to assist in preparing a planning application for the property, which was proving hard to sell. No board resolution was passed to approve the contract with Freeman & Lockyer. When Kapoor disappeared, Freeman & Lockyer sought payment of their fees from the company. In response, the company argued that Kapoor was not authorised to enter the transaction on behalf of the company. The trial judge held that Kapoor had apparent authority to bind the company. Buckhurst appealed and Lord Diplock discussed the conditions under which apparent authority is taken to exist. These are that: (1) there has been a representation that the agent had authority to enter into a contract of the kind sought to be enforced against the company (2) the representation was made by a person or persons who have actual authority to manage the business of the company either generally or in relation to the matter to which the contract relates (3) the contractor was induced by the representation to enter the contract. A fourth condition was included in Lord Diplock's list: that the contract must not be ultra vires, meaning that it must not be outside the purpose or powers of the company as stated in its constitution. As discussed in Chapter 5, the doctrine of ultra vires has now been abolished in Australia, and, under s 124, companies have the powers of a natural person. On the facts in this case, all three conditions were met. The first and second conditions were established as the board knew that Kapoor was acting as managing director in employing agents and taking other steps to find a purchaser, although he had not been officially appointed to the position: ‘They permitted him to do so, and by such conduct represented that he had authority to enter into contracts of a kind which a managing director or an executive director responsible for finding a purchaser would in the normal course be authorised to enter into on behalf of the company22 Re thie crea chauie tha ranrncantation (arthaldina aut! that actablichac annarant suitharite can tala + variant af faeme inclucdina > ranracantation hu can, In Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas,22 the High Court explained this concept in more detail. The Court noted that a holding out ‘might result from permitting a person to act in a certain manner without taking proper safeguards against misrepresentation’22 It continued: [T]he representational conduct commonly takes the form of the setting up of an organizational structure consistent with the company’s constitution. That structure represents to outsiders a complex of appearances as to authority. The assurance with which outsiders deal with a company is more often than not based, not upon inquiry, or positive statement, but upon an assumption that company officers have the authority that people in their respective positions would ordinarily be expected to have ... A kind of representation that often arises in business dealings is one which flows from equipping an officer of a company with certain title, status and facilities. Returning to the second requirement in Freeman & Lockyer, the representation must be made by the board or a person with actual authority to manage the company or to enter the contract in question. In Freeman & Lockyer, this requirement was satisfied as the board had allowed Kapoor to act as if he had power to manage the company. However, this requirement is not always easy to satisfy. For example, it is not met if an agent holds another person out as having authority to bind the company or if a single director holds someone out as an agent, unless it is a single director company. The issue of holding out was discussed in Crabtree-Vickers Pty Ltd v Australian Direct Mail Advertising and Addressing Co Pty Ltd32 The facts of this case involved the purchase of a printing machine by Australian Direct Mail Advertising and Addressing Co Pty Ltd (‘the Company’). The Company was a family company with four directors: Bruce McWilliam Snr, Bruce McWilliam Jr and both of their wives. Bruce McWilliam Snr was the chairman of the board and, although he no longer worked full-time for the company, he remained fully involved in management decisions. Bruce McWilliam Jr was called the ‘managing director’; however, he was never formally appointed, and his actual authority was limited. Also involved in the company was Peter McWilliam, the other son of Bruce McWilliam Snr. Peter had resigned as a director when he became a bankrupt but had continued to be employed by the company in relation to sales and technical matters. A committee consisting of Bruce Snr, Bruce Jr and Peter collectively managed the Company's affairs. The committee tasked Peter with getting information and quotes for a new printing machine. He was not authorised to buy a machine. Despite this, Peter placed an order for a machine and related equipment with Crabtree-Vickers on behalf of the Company. He used a blank company order form he had obtained from Bruce Jnr and signed the document on Bruce Jr's behalf. A dispute arose as to whether the Company was bound under the contract. The Company argued that Peter had no actual authority to enter the contract, and that his only authority was to obtain information and quotes. The High Court agreed and proceeded to consider whether Peter had apparent authority to bind the Company. The Court noted that both Peter and Bruce Jr made verbal representations that Peter had authority to enter the contract, with Bruce Jr also allowing Peter to appear to have authority by providing him with a blank company order form. Supplying Peter with a blank order amounted to a representation as it was ‘arming him with a document which, when he signed it, would bear the hallmark of authenticity’32 The Court held that, under the second requirement of Freeman & Lockyer, these representations did not create apparent authority as Bruce Jr had not been validly appointed as the managing director or been given authority to enter the specific contract. As such, he could not hold Peter out as having any more authority than he had. As Whelan J noted in Flexirent Capital Pty Ltd v EBS Consulting Pty Ltd34 ‘The holding out must be conducted by the principal, not the agent. A third party cannot rely upon the agent's own representation as to authority. But this does not mean that the agent’s conduct is to be ignored. The principal may hold out the agent as having authority by permitting the agent to act in a certain way or to make representations about himself or herself, or the principal may hold the agent out by equipping or arming the agent with a document or thing which enables the agent to assert authority with the hallmark of authenticity25 The result in Crabtree-Vickers can be criticised on the basis that it imposes an unreasonable expectation on third parties to inquire into an agent's authority. The contract in Crabtree-Vickers was not binding because Bruce Jr did not have actual authority to enter the contract and could not make a representation through words or conduct that Peter had authority. While it is highly unlikely that a third party would know this, the High Court considered that it was this limitation on Bruce Jr's authority, plus the readiness of Crabtree-Vickers to enter a large contract after only dealing with one person from the company, that influenced the result. The case was followed in Perkins v National Australia Bank Ltd,*8 and has since been ameliorated by the introduction of the statutory assumptions, discussed below. The final requirement for estoppel is that the representation must be relied upon by the third party. This is easy to satisfy unless it can be shown that the third The final requirement for estoppel is that the representation must be relied upon by the third party. This is easy to satisfy unless it can be shown that the third party knew or ought to have known that the agent lacked authority. In Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-GeneralZ (discussed further below), the Court held that, if any third parties have some reason to doubt an agent's authority, they are taken to be ‘put on inquiry’and must ask questions to determine if authority actually exists. Failure to ask such questions denies them the right to enforce the contract via estoppel.
## 6.20.05 Acquiescence

On occasions, an argument for implied actual authority and apparent authority can be made on the same facts where an agent has been allowed to act ina particular role or way. This overlap most often arises due to acquiescence (failure to object) by the board or by a person with actual authority to a person acting as an agent. For example, in Junker v Hepburn,38 there were two directors of a company: Scott Hepburn and Veronica Roller. Roller allowed Hepburn to negotiate a loan, including providing bank account details for where the money was to be paid, and securing a later extension to the loan. The bank details provided by Hepburn were for a personal, rather than the company’s, bank account. When the loan was not repaid, the plaintiffs sought to enforce a guarantee provided by Roller under the loan. Roller argued that Hepburn was not authorised to provide the bank details. The Court found that Roller had acquiesced to Hepburn providing the bank details. This gave rise to implied authority for Hepburn to act. As the Court noted: An implied grant of actual authority can result from acquiescence in the course of behaviour by persons who have actual authority to delegate. For example, if directors as a board stand by whilst a single director enters into transactions outside his or her authority, the board’s acquiescence in that course of dealing can constitute the grant, by implication, of actual authority to enter into those transactions.*2 Similarly, in Brick & Pipe Industries Ltd v Occidental Life Nominee Pty Ltd,“ the Court held that the board of Brick & Pipe had acquiesced to a director having effective control over the company. This case arose in the context of a guarantee being granted to Occidental Life by Abraham Goldberg, using the common seal of Brick & Pipe. Brick & Pipe was one company within a group of companies referred to by the Court as the ‘Goldberg Group: When the Goldberg Group collapsed, the validity of the guarantee was challenged by the new board of Brick & Pipe, who argued that Goldberg did not have authority to enter the guarantee on behalf of Brick & Pipe4t The guarantee had been granted as security for a loan to another company within the Goldberg Group, and Brick & Pipe did not derive any benefit from the must ask questions to determine if authority actually exists. Failure to ask such questions denies them the right to enforce the contract via estoppel.

## 6.20.05 Acquiescence

The guarantee had been granted as security for a loan to another company within the Goldberg Group, and Brick & Pipe did not derive any benefit from the transaction. The guarantee was also executed without the knowledge of the Brick & Pipe board, which consisted of a chairperson and a number of other directors who had remained on the board after the Goldberg Group took over the company, plus Goldberg, his wife, and son in-law, Mr Furst. Brick & Pipe’s Articles of Association required that use of the company seal had to be authorised by the board, and co-signed by a director and secretary. Goldberg had executed the guarantee without such authorisation, using Brick & Pipe’s common seal, and had signed as director, with Furst signing as company secretary. At the time, Furst was only a director of Brick & Pipe, not a company secretary. Although some attempt was made by Goldberg to appoint Furst as company secretary, no formal board meeting was held to approve this appointment or the guarantee. In deciding whether Brick & Pipe was bound by the guarantee, all three judges of the Appeal Division of the Victorian Supreme Court held that, under Companies (Victoria) Code s 68A (a similar section to s 129 of the Companies Act 1981 (Cth)), the fact that there was no board meeting authorising the use of the common seal did not affect the validity of the contract as Occidental Life was entitled to assume that the company’s constitution had been complied with. On the question of whether it was entitled to assume that Furst was company secretary, the Court found Goldberg had implied actual authority to hold Furst out in this manner. Ormiston J noted that the board had acquiesced in Goldberg's control of Brick & Pipe, that it had never attempted to interfere with his actions, and that Goldberg had on occasions even obtained board approval to transactions after he had entered them. Ormiston J continued: ‘Throughout the dealings with the Occidental Group, Mr. Goldberg had been known as the alter ego of each of the Goldberg Group of companies ... Nothing had occurred to indicate that he found it necessary to refer to any board, nor had any board attempted to interfere ... [even though] in the case of Brick and Pipe there was still a considerable number of outside directors ... In the circumstances it would be remarkable if that company could now say that Mr. Goldberg was not a person who could hold out on its behalf that a particular person held a position [of secretary] in that company.2 The Court concluded that Goldberg had sufficient authority through the board’s acquiescence to represent Furst as the company secretary, and the contract was binding on Brick & Pipe. particular role or way. This overlap most often arises due to acquiescence (failure to object) by the board or by a person with actual authority to a person acting as an agent. For example, in Junker v Hepburn,38 there were two directors of a company: Scott Hepburn and Veronica Roller. Roller allowed Hepburn to negotiate a loan, including providing bank account details for where the money was to be paid, and securing a later extension to the loan. The bank details provided by Hepburn were for a personal, rather than the company’s, bank account. When the loan was not repaid, the plaintiffs sought to enforce a guarantee provided by Roller under the loan. Roller argued that Hepburn was not authorised to provide the bank details. transactions.*2 The Court concluded that Goldberg had sufficient authority through the board’s acquiescence to represent Furst as the company secretary, and the contract was binding on Brick & Pipe. It can be argued that a contract is not valid if an internal rule of the company has not been complied with when entering the contract. This is dealt with by the common law ‘indoor management rule’ which provides that a person dealing with a company is entitled to assume that the company’s constitution and internal rules have been complied with.43 An expanded version of the indoor management rule is now contained in ss 128-129 of the Corporations Act (discussed below). While the common law rule continues to exist, in practice it is not often relevant as the statutory provisions are wide enough to cover most circumstances. In Morris v Kanssen,4 the House of Lords approved the following statement of the indoor management rule taken from Halsbury’s Laws of England: [P]ersons contracting with a company and dealing with a company in good faith may assume that acts within its constitution and powers have been properly and duly performed and are not bound to inquire whether acts of internal management have been regular.“ This rule evolved from the judgments of the Exchequer Chamber in Royal British Bank v Turquand.*8 This case involved a loan to a company, Cameron's Coalbrook Steam, Coal and Swansea and Loughor Railway Company (‘the Company’), with the Bank taking as security for the loan a bond signed by two of the Company’s directors. The Company seal had been used on the bond document. However, the Company's Deed of Settlement (equivalent to its constitution) provided that the directors were only authorised to borrow money in this way if their actions had been approved by an ordinary resolution of the general meeting. The Company argued that, as no valid resolution had been passed, it was not bound by the bond document. The Exchequer Chamber disagreed and held that the bond was valid and the Company was bound. It found there was no requirement for the Bank to look into whether the internal workings of the Company had been complied with and was therefore entitled to assume the approval had been obtained. The Court held that the doctrine of constructive notice only operated to attribute to the Bank knowledge of the provisions of the constitution, not whether those provisions had been complied with. As a result, the Bank did not need to inquire into such internal matters and was entitled to assume that proper approval for the loan had been given. The rule in Turquand’s Case was applied in Australia by the High Court in Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General42 Northside Developments was decided before ss 128 and 129 were introduced into the Corporations Act. The application of the rule in Turquand’s Case raises similar policy issues to those in the agency case; namely, how to balance the interests of those dealing with a company (who need contracts that appear to be validly entered into by the company to be enforceable) and the shareholders of a company (who are adversely affected when a company is liable on a contract that was entered into without authority or approval). As Mason CJ noted in Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General:

‘The precise formulation and application of [indoor management] rule call for a fine balance between competing interests. On the one hand, the rule has been developed to protect and promote business convenience which would be at hazard if persons dealing with companies were under the necessity of investigating their internal proceedings in order to satisfy themselves about the actual authority of officers and the validity of instruments. On the other hand, an over-extensive application of the rule may facilitate the commission of fraud and unjustly favour those who deal with companies at the expense of innocent creditors and shareholders who are the victims of unscrupulous persons acting or purporting to act on behalf of companies.48

## 6.25.05 The statutory assumptions

Sections 128 and 129 of the Corporations Act were introduced between 1983 and 1985 to protect third parties dealing with a company in good faith; for example, s 129 includes a wider version of the indoor management rule and the common law rule on apparent authority. It includes other assumptions and protections that a third party can rely upon. In Bank of New Zealand v Fiberi Pty Ltd,“° Kirby J noted the policy behind the sections was commercial convenience, which prioritised ‘efficacy of business transactions ... above the financial and other interests of the innocent officers, members and creditors of a particular corporation’=2 Section 128(1) provides that a person who has dealings with a company is entitled to make the assumptions set out in s 129 about the validity of those dealinas. and the companv is unable to assert that the assumptions are incorrect. It has been held that ‘dealinas with a companv’ include a sinale transaction

## 6.25.05 The statutory assumptions

Section 128(1) provides that a person who has dealings with a company is entitled to make the assumptions set out in s 129 about the validity of those dealings, and the company is unable to assert that the assumptions are incorrect. It has been held that ‘dealings with a company’ include a single transaction (Advance Bank Australia Ltd v Fleetwood Star Pty Ltd) and negotiations or other steps in relation to a contemplated transaction (Soyfer v Earlmaze Pty Ltd)*2. The meaning of the words was considered in the case of Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Frenmast Pty Ltd.>3 On the facts, Frenmast was one of three companies set up to run a licorice manufacturing business. Frenmast owned land that it leased to the second company, which manufactured the licorice and sold it to the third company. ANZ provided loans facilities to Frenmast that were guaranteed by the two other companies and some of the individuals involved in the business (the Tiricovski brothers). ANZ then sought a guarantee from Frenmast in relation to loans to one of the other companies and to Robert Tiricovski. The document appeared to bear the signatures of two directors but one of the signatures was forged.

## 6.25.05 The statutory assumptions

ANZ sued to enforce the guarantee against Frenmast and relied on the assumption in s 129(5) of the Act that the document had been duly executed. The trial judge, Adams J, held that ANZ was not entitled to rely upon this assumption as there was no evidence of dealings between ANZ and Frenmast in respect of the guarantee. Of particular importance was the fact that ANZ had not dealt with anyone within Frenmast who had actual or apparent authority to enter the guarantee on behalf of the company. On appeal, the New South Wales Court of Appeal found Adams J’s reasoning to be incorrect and overturned the decision. The Court found that for the requirement of ‘dealings with the company’ to be met, it was not necessary for ANZ to deal with a person who had authority to bind the company. All that was required was that ANZ had dealings with a person with authority to negotiate the transaction. On the facts, Robert Tiricovski had such authority as he had been the main contact point for ANZ for a number of years and the other director was aware of that fact. ANZ was entitled to assume that the director had authority to negotiate the guarantee with bank. Section 128(3) provides that the assumptions can be made even when fraud by the person acting on behalf of a company is involved. It is also not necessary that a third party actually makes the assumptions set out in s 128(3) as these automatically apply regardless of whether the third party considered the issues or not (subject to s 128(4)). However, under s 128(4), a person is not entitled to make the assumptions if they knew or suspected that the assumptions were incorrect. Section 129 contains seven assumptions that operate to the benefit of third parties. Each of the assumptions is separate and discrete, such that more than one assumption may apply.*4The assumptions operate to prevent a company asserting in proceedings that any of the issues dealt with in the section are incorrect. The assumptions also move the burden of proof from the third party to the company in relation to those issues. The assumptions do not ‘validate an instrument to which they are directed but, in a practical sense, they prevent the invalidity of it being successfully asserted (by the company)'2> The main issues covered by s 129 include:

* non-compliance with the company’s constitution and any replaceable rules that apply
* the authority of a director or company secretary who appears to be such from ASIC records available to the public and based on information from the
company

* the authority of a person held out by the company to be an officer or agent of the company The main issues covered by s 129 include:
the proper performance of duties by officers and agents of the company the due execution of documents by the company the authority of an officer or agent of a company authorised to issue a document to warrant that it is genuine. Section 129(1) Section 129(1) provides that a person can assume that a company’s constitution (if it has one) and any of the replaceable rules that apply have been complied with. This section reflects the indoor management rule and its predecessor (Companies Act 1981 s 68A). For example, if a company’s constitution requires that a board meeting be held to approve the use of the company seal, a person having dealings with the company may, in relation to those dealings, assume that such a meeting has been held if the seal is used. In Brick & Pipe, discussed above, the Court held that the fact that there was no board meeting authorising the use of the common seal did not affect the validity of the guarantee granted to Occidental Life.*®The effect of s 129(1) was to allow Occidental Life to assume that the company’s constitution had been complied with. While a person does not need to have knowledge of the constitution or the replaceable rules to benefit from the assumptions, they do need to refer to them in legal proceedings if they wish to claim that benefit 28 Section 129(2)

Section 129(2) provides that a third party may assume that a person who appears on the information provided to ASIC to be a director or secretary of a company has been duly appointed and is authorised to exercise the powers and perform the duties customarily exercised or performed by a director or secretary of a similar company. This assumption is available to third parties regardless of whether they know about the information and operates to protect them where such a person has not been properly appointed.*2 Companies are required to provide information to ASIC on its directors and company secretaries under s 205B, which requires a company to lodge with ASIC, within 28 days, the personal details of any director or secretary appointed by the company and, under pt 2N.1, dealing with the company’s annual return. This information is available to the public and operates as a form of holding out by the company that the persons named on the ASIC register are appointed to the positions indicated and have the customary authority that goes with such a role. The information must be available to the public at the time of the dealing with the company. In ANZ Banking Group Ltd v Australian Glass and Mirrors Pty Ltd,©° the Court found that a company held out a person as a company director and another as the company secretary by lodging documents with ASIC that named them as such. Section 129(2) Section 129(3)

This section overlaps with the law of apparent authority and the relevant cases discussed above at Section 6.20. Section 129(3) provides that’a person is entitled to assume that someone who is held out by the company to be an officer or agent has been duly appointed and has the authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties customarily performed by such an officer or agent of a similar company’! Section 9AD defines a company officer as including a director, company secretary, and senior executive. It follows that for a third person to rely upon the assumption in s 129(3) they must not only show that there was a holding out that a particular person was an officer or agent, but also that they exercised a power that is customarily within the scope of powers exercised by such an officer or agent. It is not necessary, however, that the third party show that the holding out was made to them directly. To determine if there has been a holding out, the common law rules of apparent authority apply as set out in Freeman & Lockyer (discussed at Section 6.20 above). There must be a representation (by words or conduct) that the person is an officer or agent of the company, and the representation must be made ‘by the company’; that is, by a group or person with authority to manage the company, such as the board or a managing director. The third party does not need to rely upon the representation. Under s 128(4), if the third party knew or suspected that the officer or agent had not been duly appointed, they are not entitled to make any of the assumptions set out in s 129. Section 129(4)

Section 129(4) provides that any person who has dealings with a company can assume that its officers and agents properly perform the duties they owe to the company. This is particularly relevant to the duties of officers and directors discussed in Chapter 10. This subsection can overlap with ss 129(2)-(3), so that a person having dealings with a company can assume that anyone who appears on the information provided to ASIC to be a director or secretary of a company, or who is held out by the company to be a director, secretary or officer, is properly performing their duties in those dealings. Sections 129(5) and 129(6)

Under s 127(1), a company can enter a contract directly where the document is signed by two directors or by a director and a company secretary. If a common seal is used on a document, s 127(2) requires that it must be witnessed by two directors or by one director and the company secretary. In a proprietary company with a single director, where that person is also the company secretary the director can witness the use of the common seal or can sign the document under ss 127(1) and (2). Sections 129(5) and (6) then allow a third party to assume that a document that appears to have been signed in accordance with ss 127(1) or (2) has been duly executed. The key requirement is that the document must appear to have been executed correctly; for example, a document just bearing the signature of one director does not attract the protection offered by s 129(5). This is different to the position under the section's predecessor (Companies Act 1981 s 68A), which required not only that a document appear to have been executed properly but also that the persons who signed had been held out to be a director and secretary, either on public documents or by the company. The case of Caratti v Mammoth Investments Ptv Ltd® confirmed that this reauirement no lonaer applies. This case involved the Caratti familv. who were divid- Section 129(4)

Section 129(4) provides that any person who has dealings with a company can assume that its officers and agents properly perform the duties they owe to the company. This is particularly relevant to the duties of officers and directors discussed in Chapter 10. This subsection can overlap with ss 129(2)-(3), so that a person having dealings with a company can assume that anyone who appears on the information provided to ASIC to be a director or secretary of a company, or who is held out by the company to be a director, secretary or officer, is properly performing their duties in those dealings. Sections 129(5) and 129(6)

The case of Caratti v Mammoth Investments Pty Ltd® confirmed that this requirement no longer applies. This case involved the Caratti family, who were divided over the application of the family’s wealth after the death of Sergio Caratti. On the one side was Allen Caratti, and on the other his mother Maddeleine and his brother John. One of the Caratti companies, Navarac Pty Ltd, owned Young River Cattle Station in Western Australia. Allen, purporting to still be a director of Mammoth Investments Pty Ltd, which held a lease over Young River granted by Navarac, tried to grant a sublease over the land to Granite Hill Pty Ltd. At the time, Allen was no longer a director of Mammoth, having been removed by his mother. He was also not named as a director on any documents lodged with ASIC. However, Allen signed the lease as a director and forged his mother's signature on the lease document. Later, another lease was granted by Navarac over Young River to Esperance Cattle Company Pty Ltd, with Navarac’s directors Aaron Caratti John’s son) and Maddeleine Caratti signing the document. In legal proceedings, the question was whether the sublease granted by Mammoth to Granite Hill was binding upon Mammoth. At first instance, Martin CJ found that, although Granite Hill was entitled to make an assumption under s 129(5) that the document had been duly executed, this assumption did not preclude Esperance Cattle (as a bona fide third party granted valid title in the land) from then establishing that the sublease was not valid. As a result, the Court held that the document was not binding on Mammoth and Esperance Cattle was entitled to possession of Young River Station. On appeal, the Western Australian Court of Appeal found that under s 128(3), the operation of s 129 was such that, once it applied, the sublease could be treated as if it validly conferred title. The fact that another third party had subsequently been granted the same interest under a validly executed contract did not change this fact. Furthermore, the fact that Allen had not been held out as a director of the company (either on documents lodged with ASIC or by the board), or that he had forged Maddeleine Caratti’s signature did not preclude the operation of s 129(5). On the face of it, the lease appeared to have been executed according to the requirements of s 127(1) and therefore it was binding on Mammoth. Section 129(7)

The final assumption available under s 129(7) allows a person who has dealings with a company to assume that any officer or agent who has authority to issue a document or a certified copy of a document on the company’s behalf also has authority to warrant that the document is genuine or that it is a true copy. 42510 Limitatiane on the annlication of the ctatutary accumntione: ¢ 1272/4) Section 129(7)

## 6.25.10 Li
itations on the application of the statutory assumptions: s 128(4) The benefit of s 129 is limited by the requirement in s 128(4) that the third party neither knew nor suspected that the assumptions were incorrect. This section has given rise to considerable speculation due to the inclusion of the word ‘suspected! A third party with actual knowledge that any of the assumptions are incorrect is not entitled to rely upon them. However, under the common law, a person is prohibited from relying upon a representation of apparent authority or the indoor management rule if they were ‘put on inquiry’ in the circumstances that the agent did not have authority or the internal rules of the company had not been complied with. This rule was applied in Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General (‘Northside’).= Northside Developments’ (‘Northside’) main business related to a piece of land that it owned. There were three directors in the company, including Robert Sturgess, and a company secretary, Gerard Sturgess, who was Robert's son. Gerard had not been properly appointed as the company secretary, but his consent to act as the company secretary had been filed with the corporate regulator. Robert and Gerard entered into a mortgage over the land owned by Northside with Barclays Credit Union. The mortgage secured a loan to another company controlled by Robert, and Northside derived no benefit from the loan. The mortgage was executed on behalf of Northside using the company’s seal and signed by Robert and Gerard as director and secretary respectively. Northside’s Articles of Association (the predecessor document to a constitution) required that the company seal could only be used with the authority of all the directors. When the company to whom the loan had been made defaulted, Barclays sold the land owned by Northside to a third party pursuant to its rights under the mortgage. Northside then sought to dispute the transfer of the land.“ The issue to be decided was whether the mortgage was binding on Northside despite it not having been executed in accordance with the company’s Articles of Association. Barclays argued it was entitled to rely upon the indoor management rule and that it was not affected by any failure of Sturgess and his son to comply with the Articles. In contrast, Northside argued that Barclays was ‘put on inquiry’ in the circumstances of the case and needed to ask further questions about Robert and Gerard's authority, as it was clear that Northside was not benefiting from the loan that was securing the mortgage. As Mason CJ noted: [T]o hold that a person dealing with a company is put upon inquiry when that company enters into a transaction which appears to be unrelated to the purposes of its business and from which it appears to gain no benefit is, in my opinion, to strike a fair balance between the competing interests [in this case]. As the case was decided before the introduction of the predecessor sections to ss 128 and 129, the High Court had to decide the issue based on the indoor management rule. All five judges of the High Court differed in their opinions as to the foundations of the indoor management rule. However, all agreed that the martaane wae invalid and that Rarrlave chanild have haan nut an inaniry hy tha circiimetancac of tha caca Ac Macan CI nated ‘fal narean evan ana wha Robert and Gerard entered into a mortgage over the land owned by Northside with Barclays Credit Union. The mortgage secured a loan to another company controlled by Robert, and Northside derived no benefit from the loan. The mortgage was executed on behalf of Northside using the company’s seal and signed by Robert and Gerard as director and secretary respectively. Northside’s Articles of Association (the predecessor document to a constitution) required that the company seal could only be used with the authority of all the directors. [T]o hold that a person dealing with a company is put upon inquiry when that company enters into a transaction which appears to be unrelated to the purposes of its business and from which it appears to gain no benefit is, in my opinion, to strike a fair balance between the competing interests [in this case]. As the case was decided before the introduction of the predecessor sections to ss 128 and 129, the High Court had to decide the issue based on the indoor management rule. All five judges of the High Court differed in their opinions as to the foundations of the indoor management rule. However, all agreed that the mortgage was invalid, and that Barclays should have been put on inquiry by the circumstances of the case. As Mason CJ noted, ‘[a] person, even one who has no special relationship with the company concerned, may be put upon inquiry by the very nature of the transaction‘ On the facts, it was clear to Barclays that the loan was being made to companies unrelated to Northside, and that Northside was gaining no benefit from it. These facts should have led Barclays’ officers to make inquiries of Robert and Gerard that they had the necessary authority to execute the mortgage on behalf of the company using the company’s seal. Itis likely that this case would have been decided differently under ss 128 and 129. Under s 129(1), Barclays would have been entitled to assume that the company’s constitution had been complied with, and this would have prevented Northside arguing there was no board approval to use the company seal. In addition, under ss 129(2) and (6), Barclays would have been entitled to assume that Gerard was validly appointed as company secretary, and that the mortgage had been validly executed, as it appeared to comply with the requirements of s 127(2)? In addition, it is unlikely that s 128(4) would have applied to limit these assumptions. In Eden Energy Ltd v Drivetrain USA Inc7° the Court noted that a person dealing with a company is not required to make any inquiry in order to rely on the assumptions in s 129. Corboy J, referring to other relevant cases on this issue, stated: [A] person does not lose the benefit of the assumptions in s 129 merely because, in the circumstances, their suspicions ought to have been aroused: Sunburst Properties Pty Ltd (in liq) v Agwater Pty Ltd [2005] SASC 335 [178] (Gray J). Section 128(4) does not incorporate the concept of being ‘put upon enquiry’: Errichetti Holdings Pty Ltd v Western Plaza Hotel Corporation Pty Ltd {2006} WASC 113 [74] (Master Newnes (as his Honour then was)); Sunburst Properties [178]. ... The expression ‘knew or suspected’ in s 128(4) does not encompass the knowledge that a person is deemed to possess in equity through a failure to make usual enquiries or a failure to enquire when put on notice of the need to enquire ... In short, actual knowledge is required and constructive knowledge is not actual knowledge. Returning to the case of Northside, the effect of the assumption in s 129(1) would be that, in the absence of actual knowledge or actual suspicion that the constitution has not been complied with (or that Gerard was not validly appointed), the bank would be entitled to make the assumption set out in the section. The relevant time to consider whether actual knowledge or suspicion existed was when the transaction was made: Barclays Finance Holdings Ltd v Sturgess! Furthermore, the onus of proof would be on the company to prove that there was actual knowledge or suspicion by the bank. In Sunburst Properties Pty Ltd (in liq) v Agwater Pty Ltd,72 Justice Gray of the Supreme Court of South Australia considered that the test in s 128(4) is subjective, and requires quiry’ in the circumstances of the case and needed to ask further questions about Robert and Gerard's authority, as it was clear that Northside was not benefiting from the loan that was securing the mortgage. As Mason CJ noted: the competing interests [in this case] 2 Returning to the case of Northside, the effect of the assumption in s 129(1) would be that, in the absence of actual knowledge or actual suspicion that the constitution has not been complied with (or that Gerard was not validly appointed), the bank would be entitled to make the assumption set out in the section. The relevant time to consider whether actual knowledge or suspicion existed was when the transaction was made: Barclays Finance Holdings Ltd v Sturgess. Furthermore, the onus of proof would be on the company to prove that there was actual knowledge or suspicion by the bank. In Sunburst Properties Pty Ltd (in liq) v Agwater Pty Ltd,72 Justice Gray of the Supreme Court of South Australia considered that the test in s 128(4) is subjective, and requires proof that the third party actually knew or actually suspected that the assumption was incorrect. This is in contrast to the common law test discussed in Northside, which considers what a reasonable person in the third party’s position would have asked in relation to the agent's authority. The inconsistency between these two tests leaves it open to future courts to add new insight into the operation of s 129(4). OC) Loading. Please wait

Authority by ratification deals with a situation where the person who purports to act for the company has neither actual nor apparent authority, but their actions are later ratified by the company as principal. For this to occur, the agent's actions must be ratified, or approved, by a majority of members in general meeting. If this occurs, it operates as a retrospective grant of actual authority to the agent, such that their actions are binding on the company. For the ratification to be effective, the contract must have been entered into on behalf of the company, not by the agent acting in their own name; the company must have had authority to enter the contract at the time it was made; and ratification must relate to the entire contract. Cc) Loading. Please wait

An issue can arise as to the validity of contracts entered into on behalf of a company before it is registered. It is not uncommon for the founders of a company (called ‘promoters’) to execute contracts before or at the same time as a company is being registered, such as contracts for leasing premises, buying stock, building websites and so on. Promoters are also generally involved in the preliminary matters required to set up a company, including negotiating shareholder agreements, preparing the company’s constitution, contacting directors and shareholders, and arranging fundraising. In all of these actions, promoters act as fiduciaries in relation to the company. Fiduciary duties are discussed extensively in Chapters 10-12. When a promoter enters a contract on behalf of a company that has not yet been registered, ss 131-3 apply to determine the rights and liabilities of the parties under the contract. Prior to these sections being introduced, the common law position was that a company could not enter a contract before incorporation as it had no legal existence. The law of agency did not apply as there was no principal to appoint an agent or later to ratify the agent’s conduct. This meant that any contract entered into before a company was registered was not binding on the company and was not binding on the person purporting to act as agent, unless it could be shown the agent intended to contract as the principal. This created problems for the other parties to the contract. The difficulties with pre-incorporation contracts have been overcome by ss 131-3, which replace the common law. Under s 131(1), a company becomes bound by, and is entitled to the benefit of, a pre-incorporation contract entered into on its behalf or for its benefit if the company is registered and ratifies the contract within an agreed time or within a reasonable time after the contract is entered into. Once the contract is ratified, it is binding on the company and can be enforced against it by the third party. The concept of’a reasonable time’ is not defined in the Act and must be decided on the facts of each case. In Classic International Pty Ltd v Lagos,25 it was held that a period of one month to ratify a commercial lease was reasonable. The Corporations Act does not specify how ratification should occur. In practice, pre-incorporation contracts are ratified by the board of directors passing a resolution approving the contract, or where the company signs a document to that effect. The partial performance of a contract may also result in implied ratification. The power to ratify a contract on behalf of a company can also be delegated to an individual under s 126(1). A pre-incorporation contract is formed on the date it is ratified, rather than on the date it was initially entered into.2® If a contract is not ratified or is not ratified within the specified time or a reasonable time, the person who entered the contract can be liable to pay damages to the other party to the contract (s 131(2)). The amount of damages is the amount the company would have been liable to pay if the contract had been ratified and then breached by the company. This includes loss of profit by the other party and amounts spent in reliance upon the contract. Under s 131(3)(c), the company may have to repay some or all of the damages to the person who entered the contract on its behalf. The court may order the company to transfer to the other contracting party property that the company received under the contract or pay an amount to that party to the contract. Promoters need to ensure any contracts entered into before a company is registered are ratified. Alternatively, promoters can wait until after registration to contract on the company’s behalf. The later approach is best as, even if a company ratifies a contract, a promoter may be liable to pay damages if the company breaches the contract. Under s 131(4), a promoter may be ordered to pay the whole or part of any damages the ratifying company is ordered to pay upon breach. This provision is aimed at deterring promoters who set up companies to get the benefit of limited liability, but the company is under-capitalised and unable to pay its debts on registration. Sections 131 and 132 provide ways promoters can protect themselves from liability under pre-incorporation contracts. One is to obtain a signed release of liability from the other party to the contract (s 132(1)). Another is to have the company and the third party enter into a new contract on the same terms and conditions once the company is registered (ss 131(1)-(3)). O Loading. Please wait
