# Chapter 15

Receivership, schemes of arrangement, small business restructuring and oluntary administration 15.05 Introduction 15.10 Insolvency. 15.15 Insolvency law within corporate regulation 15.20 Secured creditors in insolvency 15.25 Receivership
## 15.25.05 Private appointment
## 15.25.10 Powers, duties and liabilities at law and in the Corporations Act

## 15.25.15 The court-appointed receiver

## 15.25.20 Order of payment

## 15.25.25 Effects of appointment of receiver 15.30 Relationship between receivership and other external adm 15.35 Schemes of arrangement

## 15.35.05 A scheme must involve an arrangement or compromise 15.40 Voluntary administration

## 15.40.05 Commencing_a voluntary administration

## 15.40.10 The administrator's role

## 15.40.15 Creditors’ meetings 15.45 A deed of company arrangement

## 15.45.10 Setting aside a DOCA 15.50 Small business restructuring 15.55 Review of the insolvency regime 15.60 Summary C) Loading. Please wait

External administration refers to the administration of the company by an external party. The processes that form part of external administration are receivership, schemes of arrangement, voluntary administration and liquidation. Liquidation or winding up is the final step in external administration and is discussed in Chapter 16. Before discussing these processes, it is necessary to consider what it means for a company to be insolvent. Insolvency is a pre-condition to most external administrations.4 For example, voluntary administration cannot occur unless it can be shown that, as a question of fact, the company is or is nearing insolvency. Insolvency is defined by s 95A of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth). The effect of sub-ss (1) and (2) of s 95A is that a company is insolvent if it is not able to pay all of its debts as and when they become due and payable. An important feature of this definition is that insolvency is not measured simply by determining whether the company’s debts exceed its assets, known as the ‘balance sheet test of insolvency. This section takes a different approach. This is necessary because a company might, for example, have a balance sheet that shows an excess of assets over debts, but is unable to pay debts at the time they are due because its assets are locked up in investments that cannot readily be released. The definition in s 95A directs attention to the company’s cash flow position, known as the ‘commercial’ or ‘cash flow’ test of solvency. The definition in s 95A comprises of two questions. First, is the company ‘able to pay’all its debts? Second, are the debts ‘due and payable’? We look at these questions in turn. In determining a company’s ability to pay its creditors, it is necessary to look at the overall situation of the company, having regard to ‘commercial realities. As noted in Re Kerisbeck Pty Ltd, ‘[t]he Court must ... assess the overall trading and financial position of the company in question and ascertain whether, in the light of all the facts, that company is able to meet its obligations’ Accordingly, ability to pay is not decided solely by reference to assets currently held by the company. In Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9) Owen J emphasised that: Commercial reality dictates that the assessment of available funds is not confined to the company’s cash resources. It is legitimate to take into account funds the company can, on a real and reasoned view, realise by sale of assets, borrowing against the security of its assets, or by other reasonable means. It is a question of fact to be determined in accordance with the evidence? This confirms the classic statement in Sandell v Porter® that insolvency is: an inability to pay debts as they fall due out of the debtor's own money. But the debtors’ own moneys are not limited to [their] cash resources immediately available. They extend to moneys which [they] can procure by realisation, by sale, by mortgage or pledge of [their] assets within a relatively short time—relative to the nature and amount of the debts and to the circumstances, including the nature of the business, of the debtor. The conclusion of insolvency ought to be clear from a consideration of the debtor’s financial position in its entirety and generally speaking ought not to be drawn simply from evidence of a temporary lack of liquidity. It is the debtor's inability, utilising such cash resources as [they have] or can command through the use of [their] assets, to meet [their] debts as they fall due which indicates insolvency? In Lewis v Doran, the New South Wales Court of Appeal stated that: there is no compelling reason to exclude from consideration funds which can be gained from borrowings secured on assets of third parties, or even unsecured borrowings. If the company can borrow without security, it will have funds to pay its debts as they fall due and will be solvent, provided of course that the borrowing is on deferred payment terms or otherwise such that the lender itself is not a creditor whose debt cannot be repaid as and when it becomes due and payable. It comes down to a question of fact, in which the key concept is ability to pay the company’s debts as and when they become due and payable! These extracts demonstrate that answering the question as to whether a company is ‘able to pay’ involves more than simply a consideration of the balance lnk Ree dae ate Ea Ee a 12 eee 2d tee These extracts demonstrate that answering the question as to whether a company is ‘able to pay’ involves more than simply a consideration of the balance sheet. Any deficiency in assets disclosed by the balance sheet can, of course, be taken into consideration!2—but the final determination of solvency requires taking a wider view. The second question in determining insolvency is whether the debts are ‘due and payable’ Referring to this phrase in Southern Cross Interiors Pty Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, Palmer J noted that ‘unfortunately’ the drafter of s 95A has used two words ‘when one would have sufficed’, adding that ‘the words “due” and “payable” are clearly synonymous in this context’!3 The case went on to consider the common situation that arises where the due date for payment of a debt as stipulated in the contract has arrived, but the creditor has given the company further time to pay. Is the debt ‘due and payable’ on the contractually stipulated date, or can the courts take into account ‘normal or likely indulgences granted to the company by its creditors’?/4 In Southern Cross, Palmer J reviewed the conflicting case law on this question and concluded that: [A] contract debt is payable at the time stipulated for payment in the contract unless there is evidence, proving to the Court's satisfaction, that:

+ there has been an express or implied agreement between the company and the creditor for an extension of the time stipulated for
payment; or
+ there is a course of conduct between the company and the creditor sufficient to give rise to an estoppel preventing the creditor from
relying upon the stipulated time for payment; or

+ there has been a well-established and recognised course of conduct in the industry in which the company operates, or as between the
company and its creditors as a body, whereby debts are payable at a time other than that stipulated in the creditors’ terms of trade or are payable only on demand As noted, the court’s inquiry is factual. This means that the court does not engage in hypothetical analyses. This was explained in Re Kerisbeck Pty Ltd: If the company is not obliged to repay a debt now or in the immediate future, it should not be subject of a winding up order made on the basis that, if it were obliged, it would not be able to meet that obligation 2® The court's task is to ascertain, as a question of fact, from the company’s financial position taken as a whole and having regard to commercial realities,2 whether the company is suffering from a temporary lack of liquidity,18 or an ‘endemic shortage of working capital’12 Finally, there are several instances where insolvency is presumed under the Corporations Act. For example, where the company is being wound up and it is proven that the company was insolvent at a particular time during the 12 months ending on the relation-back day, then the company is presumed to be insolvent throughout those 12 months.2 Further, failing to keep appropriate financial records which would at least enable true and fair financial statements to be prepared and audited,2" or failing to keep financial records for the previous seven years2 will result in a presumption that the company was insolvent. Insolvency law is an important part of corporate regulation. It is inevitable that not all companies will succeed, and those that fail will leave behind unpaid debts.23 The consequences of insolvency can be wide-ranging, regardless of the size of the company concerned. Most failed companies have employees, suppliers, and customers who may be left without full payment of debts owed to them. The larger the company—or the more specific its business—the greater the degree of harm to the community. For example, when HIH Insurance Ltd collapsed in 2001, it was one of Australia’s largest insurers, with thousands of employees, tens of thousands of shareholders and over one million policy-holders, particularly in niche insurance markets, such as professional indemnity and public liability insurance. The Australian Law Reform Commission's General Insolvency Inquiry,4 also known as the Harmer Report, provides a useful summary of the purposes of insolvency law and its role within broader corporate regulation. These purposes assist in understanding the policy behind the methods of external administration examined in this chapter and Chapter 16. The fundamental purpose of insolvency law is to ‘provide a fair and orderly process for dealing with the financial affairs’? of insolvent companies. In line with that fundamental purpose, insolvency law should also: provide mechanisms that enable the insolvent and creditor to participate with the least possible delay and expense be impartial, efficient and expeditious provide convenient means of collecting or recovering property of the insolvent to be applied to the payment of debts and liabilities retain and in some areas reinforce the principle of equal sharing (pari passu) between creditors provide as an end result the effective relief or release from financial liabilities and obligation of the insolvent as far as convenient and practical, support the commercial and economic processes of the community as far as possible and practical, harmonise with the general law enable ancillary assistance in the administration of an insolvency originating in a foreign jurisdiction2® Spender summarises these principles and other commercial behaviour into ‘four essential tenets’ of insolvency law: collective action, harmony with non-insolvency law, strategic behaviour, and rehabilitation.22 These tenets are visible within the external administration processes discussed in this chapter and Chapter 16. Receivership, which we consider next, demonstrates harmony with non-insolvency laws and strategic behaviour. As will be discussed shortly, receivership developed as an equitable remedy, and the duties and powers of receivers are analysed on the basis of the agency relationship established in the security agreement. The secured creditor may enforce the rights granted to it under the security agreement, or may decide—after a strategic analysis of their position and the position of the company—that an alternative method of external administration would best suit their interests. By contrast, voluntary administration demonstrates collective action, strategic behaviour, and rehabilitation through engagement by the administrator with the creditors as part of the meeting and reporting processes. Also in line with these tenets is the potential for voluntary administration to result in the company’s survival according with the aim in s 435A of maximising the chances of the company or its businesses remaining in existence and, if that is not possible, achieving a better outcome for the creditors than would result from an immediate winding up. The external administration process depends on the course of action taken by the creditors, members and directors of the company. Asecured creditor is one who has provided something—usually finance—to the company in exchange for a security interest over company assets. This may be by way of a mortgage over company property or a charge over company assets and will be set out in a security agreement that establishes the proprietary interests of the creditor in that asset. If a question of insolvency in the debtor company arises, a secured creditor will have a number of courses of action open to them. These actions depend on the rights associated with the security under the security agreement and others which are recognised in the Corporations Act or by the nature of security arrangements. A secured creditor may choose to allow the insolvency processes—such as voluntary administration or liquidation—to take its course with or without becoming directly involved. As we discuss below, a secured creditor is afforded a degree of protection through the voting mechanisms which occur at the end of a voluntary administration, and, as discussed in Chapter 16, may have the assets over which their security extends excluded from the pool of assets from which the liquidator makes their distribution. If the property secured by the interest will adequately compensate the secured creditor regardless of the process, a secured creditor may be prepared for the company to engage in the voluntary administration process. If their security does not entirely compensate them for the debt—for example, if some aspect of the debt is unsecured—then the creditor may commence a receivership to ensure they get the best return for their debt. The path the creditor chooses depends on their individual circumstances, the secured assets, the debtor company, and its other creditors. The type of asset and the security over which it is taken plays a part in the creditor's decision. There are two descriptions used for security interests: circulating and non-circulating security interests.28 These were previously called ‘floating’ and ‘fixed’ charges, respectively.22 For a non-circulating security interest, the creditor's interest in the asset over which the security interest is granted is set and ascertainable as established from the date of entering into the security agreement. The company cannot deal with the asset in any way which would interfere with the creditor's proprietary right in the asset without seeking the creditor's permission. A mortgage over real property is an example of a non-circulating security interest. In contrast, with a circulating security interest, the asset over which the interest is taken may be in flux, such as stock on hand. In this case, although the security is still taken over the asset, the company can deal with it in the normal course of business without seeking the consent of the creditor. The security does not directly attach to the asset until an intervening event specified in the security agreement. After that event, the security attaches directly to the relevant assets, and from that point the company cannot deal with them without the permission of the creditor22The Corporations Act treats circulating and non-circulating security interests differently in external administration, and this is discussed below. If the security agreement is breached by the company—usually for non-compliance with the repayment schedule or by entering into one of the other external administration processes—then the creditor may ‘realise the security’ This means they can sell the property or asset over which they have security to seek repayment of their debt. The creditor can choose to do this personally or through an agent to become a mortgagee in possession, or they appoint a receiver to do so on their behalf. The right to private appointment can arise under the Corporations Act! Until the 1990s, there were tax advantages to becoming a mortgagee in possession, but with the removal of these benefits,22 receivership is preferred by secured creditors. The definition in s 9 of the term controller’ includes both receivers and mortgagees in possession, and the duties and liabilities imposed in pt 5.2 of the Corporations Act apply to both a mortgagee in possession and to an appointed receiver. When taking security in exchange for providing finance to the company, creditors usually request that authority to appoint a receiver be included as a term of the security agreement. This authorises the secured party, in the event of default as defined by the agreement, to appoint a receiver to enforce the security interest by taking control of the secured property. Security may be granted over a range of types of property and over varying proportions of the company’s assets and may be a mix of circulating and non-circulating security interests. Consequently, the scope of the receiver's operations will depend on the circumstances of the company and the secured creditor, and the scope of the security agreement entered into between them. For example, if a creditor takes security over all of the company’s assets and undertakings, then a receiver appointed under that security will take control over the entire company until the debt is recovered and will be called a ‘receiver and manager’? This is the most common method by which creditors such as banks will take security. Management powers must be expressly conferred.*4 By contrast, if security is only taken over a single asset of the company that is not required for the company’s business to function, then the receiver will only take control of that asset and will have no further effect on the conduct of the company’s business. This chapter refers to controllers of this type as ‘receivers:

## 15.25.05 Private appointment

A receiver can be appointed in one of two ways: the first, as mentioned above, occurs under the terms of a security agreement. This is a private appointment, deriving from the rights of the creditor in the security agreement.2® Private appointment can occur in limited circumstances under the Corporations Act3® The second, although far less commonplace, is where the court appoints a receiver, as discussed below. Due to the fact that private appointments are more common, much of the law surrounding the appointment of receivers is managed through the law of contract.2 The security agreement sets out the circumstances in which a receiver may be appointed. This can include default in payment; the business ceasing, or threatening to cease; the company being insolvent; default of some other obligation specified; or another creditor taking possession of property or appointing a receiver. In the instance of a circulating security interest, the right to appoint a receiver will be linked to the events that cause default. The purpose of a receivership derives from the nature of the appointment: the receiver is in place to realise the secured asset to satisfy the debt owed to the creditor who appoints them. Receivers have different motivations to other external administrators, such as administrators or liquidators. As noted above, receivership is concerned with recovering the debt for the appointing creditor, with a secondary obligation to the company and other creditors as discussed below. By contrast, as Chapter 16 examines, liquidation is concerned with ensuring the unsecured creditors share equally and fairly in the distribution of an insolvent company’s inadequate assets, preventing further harm to the community from insolvent companies and encouraging the investigation of the company’s affairs prior to liquidation. In order to be validly appointed as a receiver, the appointee must be a registered liquidator under s 418(1)(d)28 They must not be a mortgagee of the company’s property, an auditor, director, secretary, senior manager or employee of that company, or a related company,22 or of the company’s mortgagee. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) has the ability under s 418(1)(f) to direct that this section does not apply. Should there be concern about the validity of the appointment of the receiver, the company or one of the company’s creditors can apply to the court under s 418A to make an order declaring that the appointment of the receiver (or their entering into the possession of the company’s property) was valid or not.

## 15.25.10 Powers, duties and liabilities at law and in the Corporations Act

A receiver's powers are established by the security agreement, supplemented by the Corporations Act. Appointment of a receiver by a creditor creates legal relationships between the creditor and the receiver, the receiver and the company, and the creditor and the company. These relationships grant the receiver certain powers, but also impose duties and liabilities upon them which have the potential to come into conflict. Powers Beyond the security agreement, the Corporations Act provides in s 420(1) that the receiver ‘has power to do, in Australia and elsewhere, all things necessary or convenient to be done for or in connection with, or as incidental to, the attainment of the objectives for which the receiver was appointed’ Without limiting the generality of this provision, s 420(2) then specifies a long list of powers which receivers are presumed to have unless the document under which they are accepted that under s 420A the power of sale is subject to an objective standard, which requires ‘independent valuations of the property and advice as to the most appropriate method of sale in order that the market value or best price be realised’4* Einstein J noted that when first drafted, s 420A did not include the phrase ‘market value, which accorded with the recommendation of the Harmer Report that ‘obtaining a true market value is costly and difficult for partly manufactured goods or products with a limited market’42 However, the Corporate Law Reform Bill 1992, when introduced to Parliament, included that phrase, as did the final enacted section. Although s 420A made no requirement that the property be sold at any particular time, and that it is not necessary to postpone a sale until a more favourable purchase price can be obtained,“¢ Einstein J concluded that ‘market value’ is intended to protect the sale of goods which have an ascertainable value.“ Only if the property does not have a market value at the date of sale will s 420A(1)(b) apply, requiring all reasonable care to sell the property for the best price obtainable in the circumstances. The cattle did have a market value, and that the first limb of the section applied. The receiver's incorrect choice of valuation for the cattle at meat value rather than breeding stock, the failure to take reasonable care to ensure that the cattle had specialist advertising, promotion and marketing in accordance with the sale of such particular property, and the failure to give sufficiently early notice concerning the cattle to attract prospective buyers for such specialist property were all relevant to a breach of s 420A(1)(a).4# Asimilar consideration was made by the Court in Florgale Uniforms Pty Ltd v Orders,42 where the property in question was customised uniforms. DoddsStreeton J discussed the fact that for such specialist goods there was no real ‘market; and a ‘market value’ was hard to ascertain. There, the criticisms of the receiver turned less to the price obtained and more to the method of sale, as the receiver sold the goods at auction. The company plaintiff argued, unsuccessfully, that a better price would have been achieved if the receiver had conducted a large-scale ‘closing down sale, targeting the existing customer base of Florgale's uniforms. Dodds-Streeton J concluded on factual grounds that s 420A had not been breached in this case. Both limbs of s 420A(1) require the receiver to take care in selecting the best method of sale for the market for the property. Receivers are required to exercise their powers bona fide in the interests of the appointing creditor, and in accordance with the purpose for which they were given.*2 If the secured creditor appoints a receiver to take control of and exercise their rights in regard to the secured property, at equity they will be deemed an agent of the creditor21 This exposes the creditor to liability for the acts of their agent—the receiver—in the process of realising the security. The security agreement will set out that the creditor appoints the receiver as an agent of the company, and not as an agent of themselves. This relationship is recognised as a‘special and limited’ agency relationship,-2 and does not attract the full force of equity, such as the fiduciary obligations typically owed by an agent.*2 The limited nature of the agency relationship is attributed to the fact that the asset which the receiver is dealing with is, from a proprietary perspective, the asset of the creditor and not the company. The receiver's obligation to account to the company is limited. Duties A receiver is listed within the definition of ‘officer’ in s 9AD(c) of the Corporations Act. Consequently, directors’ duties as discussed in Chapters 11-13 apply to receivers, with the exception of the duty to prevent insolvent trading under s 588G, which does not extend to officers. As discussed above, receivers are considered agents of the company, and not of the appointing creditor, although they do owe a primary duty to the creditor. Receivers are not subject to the full scope of fiduciary obligations, but may not purchase the secured property, nor may an agent, trustee or company controlled by the receiver.4 The receiver has possession of the assets subject to the security agreement for the limited purpose of accounting to the creditor, and is obliged to hold the remaining funds for the company and its other unpaid creditors.= Should there be surplus funds, the receiver becomes subject to a fiduciary obligation when dealing with those funds.** Under the Act, receivers are subject to a number of specific statutory obligations, such as the requirement to lodge notice of their appointment®Z and sixmonthly and final accounts with ASIC,°8 and to report to ASIC.*2 Their reporting obligations include reporting any offences that may have been committed by officers or members of the company, past and present; any misapplication of the company’s money or property, or any liability to account for such property; and any negligence, default, breach of duty or breach of trust in relation to the company by any person involved in the formation, promotion, administration, management or winding up of the company.©2 Liab s and indemnities Once appointed, s 419 imposes personal liability on the receiver ‘for debts incurred by the person during the course of the receivership, possession or control for services Duties A receiver is listed within the definition of ‘officer’ in s 9AD(c) of the Corporations Act. Consequently, directors’ duties as discussed in Chapters 11-13 apply to receivers, with the exception of the duty to prevent insolvent trading under s 588G, which does not extend to officers. As discussed above, receivers are considered agents of the company, and not of the appointing creditor, although they do owe a primary duty to the creditor. Receivers are not subject to the full scope of fiduciary obligations, but may not purchase the secured property, nor may an agent, trustee or company controlled by the receiver.4 The receiver has possession of the assets subject to the security agreement for the limited purpose of accounting to the creditor, and is obliged to hold the remaining funds for the company and its other unpaid creditors.== Should there be surplus funds, the receiver becomes subject to a fiduciary obligation when dealing with those funds.** Liab s and indemnities rendered, goods purchased or property hired, leased, used or occupied! An invalid appointment could lead to the appointee being personally liable for trespass and conversion if they dealt with the company’s assets without authority. However, s 419(3) permits the court to impose this liability onto the secured creditor instead of the appointee. The court may also order under s 1322 that any action taken by an improperly appointed receiver is valid and may relieve a person of civil liability incurred as a result of the appointment.2 Under s 419A if, after a receiver has been appointed, the company continues to use or occupy property owned by a third party for more than seven days, the receiver will become personally liable for the rent and other amounts payable under any agreement with the third party. To avoid this liability, the receiver must give the third party notice.©3 This provision was inserted in line with a Harmer Report recommendation to that effect, as it is not equitable for a receiver to permit the company—and therefore indirectly the creditor—to continue to obtain benefits under a lease agreement without being liable for the payments that the company would otherwise be liable to make. As the security documentation will usually provide that the receiver is an agent of the company, they will be entitled to an indemnity from the company, which covers expenses incurred by the receiver. They may also seek one from the appointing creditor. The receiver is entitled to a lien over the secured assets to enforce this indemnity, which results in their costs being recovered prior to the secured creditor's debt. However, this indemnity will be lost in the event of a breach of duty by the receiver. As a receiver is recognised in s 9 as an officer of the company, the limits on indemnity provided by the company imposed by ss 199A-AC of the Corporations Act will also apply.“* These limits do not apply to an indemnity provided by the secured creditor.

## 15.25.15 The court-appointed receiver

Under the Corporations Act, the court has the power to appoint a receiver in circumstances which may not necessitate consideration of the company’s solvency. These powers will be exercised ‘only after great scrutiny and in extraordinary circumstances’®8 Further powers exist in all jurisdictions for the Supreme or Federal Court to appoint a receiver where it is ‘just and convenient’ or ‘just or convenient’ to do so.2 That has been interpreted as being circumstances where ‘it is practicable and the interests of justice require it!22 Such appointments are relatively rare.

## 15.25.15 The court-appointed receiver

Under the Corporations Act, the court has the power to appoint a receiver in circumstances which may not necessitate consideration of the company’s solvency. These powers will be exercised ‘only after great scrutiny and in extraordinary circumstances’®8 Further powers exist in all jurisdictions for the Supreme or Federal Court to appoint a receiver where it is ‘just and convenient’ or ‘just or convenient’ to do so.©2 That has been interpreted as being circumstances where ‘it is practicable and the interests of justice require it:22 Such appointments are relatively rare. Standing to apply for such an appointment will be given to any party to a cause or matter before the court, under the court rules in each jurisdiction. There is no obligation to demonstrate a proprietary interest in the asset over which the appointment is sought, and these powers have been used to appoint receivers on the application of both secured and unsecured creditors.21 Appointment of a receiver may be interlocutory or final; for example, a receiver may be sought to be appointed by a creditor concerned that assets will be dissipated in the course of other legal proceedings. This was the case in National Australia Bank Ltd v Bond Brewing Holdings Ltd,2 where a receiver and manager was appointed until a further order could be made, and was then ordered to continue in place until the trial of a separate action could be completed. That order was overturned on appeal, where the Court noted that a receiver will not be appointed to an insolvent company where the application is opposed by the company. When a receiver is appointed by the court, the court must provide them with sufficient powers to undertake their tasks. A court-appointed receiver is also an officer of the court, and it is considered contempt of court to interfere with the possession of such a receiver without the leave of the court. Court-appointed receivers are entitled to an indemnity for their remuneration”4 and any liabilities incurred over the course of the receivership, which is also forfeited should they act improperly.

## 15.25.20 Order of payment

The sum realised by the receiver will be distributed according to a number of legislative provisions. Land tax and customs duty are given first priority for payment on any funds recovered by the receiver If the security interest was a circulating security interest or a floating charge, s 433 requires that certain creditors, particularly employees, are granted priority to the secured creditor if the company is not being wound up. This is because a circulating security interest allows the company to continue to trade. Employees may have increased the value of the asset which is the subject of the security interest and as such their rights should be given priority.2* These priorities are set out in s 433.24 First, s 433(3)(a) stipulates payment to any insured third party under s 562, if moneys from that insurance policy are received. Then, according to s 433(3)(b), any auditor's fees and expenses if the auditor was refused consent to resign by ASIC under s 329(6) are to be paid. Employee wages and superannuation contributions as set out in ss 556(1)(e), (g), (h) or 560 are next according to s 433(3)(c), but this priority payment is subject to any other auditor's fees as set out in ss 433(6) and (7). These provisions are discussed in Chapter 16. After wages and superannuation contributions, other employee entitlements and retrenchments must be paid before the secured creditor. If the company is being wound up, then s 556 will ap- ply, as discussed in Chapter 16. ous

## 15.25.20 Order of payment
be paid. Employee wages and superannuation contributions as set out in ss 556(1)(e), (g), (h) or 560 are next according to s 433(3)(c), but this priority payment is subject to any other auditor's fees as set out in ss 433(6) and (7). These provisions are discussed in Chapter 16. After wages and superannuation contributions, other employee entitlements and retrenchments must be paid before the secured creditor. If the company is being wound up, then s 556 will apply, as discussed in Chapter 16.

## 15.25.25 Effects of appointment of receiver

The appointment of a receiver has no effect on the company as a separate legal entity, beyond the requirement in s 428 that the words ‘receiver appointed’ be attached after the name of the company where it first appears in any public document or negotiable instrument. This serves to alert new creditors or those intending to enter into agreements with the company that there is a receiver appointed, and to make further inquiries to ascertain the position of the company. Company officers’ powers of management are superseded by the receiver's powers, but they remain subject to the statutory and general law duties which apply to officers and directors. This includes the power to bring an action in the name of the company, such as to challenge the validity of the receiver’s appointment or to argue a breach by the secured creditor 28 The appointment of a receiver does not automatically terminate employee contracts with the company, but the circumstances of the appointment may lead to such a termination. If the company’s business is sold, the receiver negotiates a new contract with employees that is inconsistent with the previous contract, or the role of the receiver is inconsistent with ongoing employment, then the contracts will be terminated. When a receiver is appointed as an agent of the company, rather than the creditor, then employee contracts generally continue.22 By contrast, the appointment of a receiver by the court will almost invariably terminate existing employee contracts.£2 Schemes of arrangement are one of the two main processes available when a company, or part of it, may be able to continue to trade, or where creditors think that they can achieve more return on their debts from an arrangement with the company than on liquidation. The other process is voluntary administration. A new process of restructuring, introduced in 2021 and located in pt 5.3B of the Corporations Act, is available to small companies with liabilities of $1 million or less and are insolvent or likely to become insolvent. Both voluntary administration and small business restructuring are discussed below. Ascheme of arrangement involves a rearrangement or compromise of the rights and obligations of a company’s creditors and/or its members. Schemes are not only available when a company is insolvent; they can also be undertaken as part of a takeover scheme.** In this chapter, we only discuss schemes of arrangement entered into as part of dealing with a company’s indebtedness. This type of scheme involves a binding plan between the company and its creditors, or a class of creditors, in which the creditors’ rights are deferred, rearranged or extinguished. Such schemes may also affect the rights of members. Registered company liquidators can act as scheme administrators on behalf of a company. The scheme administrator's role and powers are set out in the scheme proposal. Schemes of arrangement are particularly useful when a company has many creditors, making individual negotiations about the repayment of debt difficult, or where there are different types of creditors. Schemes are also suited to larger companies, where insolvencies are complex, and can be included as part of a liquidation. This was demonstrated in the case of Re Lehman Brothers Australia Ltd (in liq) (No 2) where the liquidators of Lehman Brothers Australia (‘LBA’) sought court approval to convene a meeting of creditors involved in a class action against the company. LBA was a subsidiary of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc (‘Lehman Brothers’), which had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the United States. After LBA’s collapse, several former clients commenced a class action against LBA and sought compensation for losses they suffered as a result of advice and products recommended by LBA. Prior to the liquidator applying to the court to convene the creditors’ meeting, a judgment had been obtained in the class action, and the creditors had tried to enforce this judgment directly against some of the insurers of Lehman Brothers in the United States. The insurers disputed their liability both to LBA and to the creditors. The Court agreed to make an order convening a meeting of the creditors involved in the class action, and a scheme was subsequently approved by the creditors at a final court hearing. Some of the key elements of the scheme were that the overseas insurers would pay $50 million to LBA for distribution to this group of creditors and, in return, the creditors would release all claims against the insurers. However, the creditors retained the right to prove any outstanding claims not met by this payment in the winding up of LBA. Despite the usefulness of the scheme of arrangement in this case, the use of schemes for insolvency has become less common since the introduction of voluntary administration in 1992. This is largely because schemes require court involvement and approval; whereas deeds of company arrangement entered into as part of a voluntary administration do not. As a result, voluntary administration can be quicker and cheaper than schemes of arrangement.

## 15.35.05 Ascheme must involve an arrangement or compromise

Under s 411, a scheme of arrangement must include ‘a compromise or arrangement’ between a company and its creditors, or any class of them. These words have been construed broadly, with the courts increasingly adopting a flexible approach as to what they can cover®2 This was demonstrated in the case of Re Fowler v Lindholm; Opes Prime Stockbroking Ltd,#8 where a stockbroking company became insolvent. The facts involved in this case are complex, and once the company became insolvent, different processes of receivership, voluntary administration, schemes of arrangement, and liquidation were involved. This particular judgment focused on the scheme of arrangement. Opes Prime was involved in margin lending and lent money to its clients to invest in relatively small stocks traded on the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX). Opes Prime then entered into call loans, where it borrowed money from large commercial banks, using the clients’ shares as security for the loans. With the onset of the global financial crisis in late 2007 and early 2008, the commercial banks made calls (that is, demanded repayment) on the loans to Opes Prime. When it became apparent that Opes Prime could not meet these calls, the banks (including ANZ and Merrill Lynch) appointed receivers, who then sold the shares secured by the loans to repay the moneys owing to ANZ and Merrill Lynch. The resulting claims against Opes Prime's by investors who had lost their shares were estimated at over $600 million.®2 The liquidator, and some of Opes Prime’s clients, made claims against the banks in relation to the security they had taken over the clients’ shares. A creditors’ scheme of arrangement was negotiated between these parties, under which the banks paid $240 million to the liquidator, and the clients accepted 37 cents in the dollar as reoavment for their losses and released their claims aaainst the banks and the receivers. Finkelstein J. at first instance. noted the wide purpose only bind the creditors of the company and not any third parties. This view was based on a literal reading of sections in pt 5.3A the Corporations Act24
## 15.35.10 The process of approval of a scheme of arrangement

Under ss 411(1) and 412, an application to the court to approve a scheme of arrangement can be made by the company, a creditor or class of creditors, a member or a liquidator, and must include details of the proposed scheme and an explanatory statement detailing the nature of the scheme. It is for the court to decide whether to order a meeting of the affected creditors or members. Factors that a court may consider in deciding whether to order a meeting include whether the explanatory statement complies with the law, whether ultimate approval of the scheme by the court is likely, and whether the proposed scheme is commercially fair and reasonable. Substantive discussion about the fairness of the scheme is, however, usually reserved for the creditors’ meeting. In ordering that a creditors’ or shareholders’ meeting be convened, the court may direct that it be held in a particular manner and at a particular place (s 411(1)). Ifa court grants leave for a meeting to be convened, this does not mean the court has given its approval to the contents of the scheme.2= If an order for a meeting is granted, and the creditors or members approve the scheme by a special majority (defined in s 411(4)), they can then apply back to the court to have the scheme approved. The court is likely to approve the scheme if the procedure for convening the creditors’ meeting and distributing the explanatory memorandum were complied with.2¢ If an order approving the scheme is made, a copy of the order must be lodged with ASIC. The role of the court in reviewing a scheme at the first hearing was discussed in Re CSR Ltd. In this case, CSR Ltd wanted to separate its two main businesses into two companies: one involved in building products and aluminium production, and the other in sugar and renewable energy. The building products business was facing significant present and future liabilities in relation to claims for asbestos-related diseases. CSR applied to the Court for approval to hold a members’ meeting to consider a scheme setting up the new company to take over the debts and liabilities of the building products, and a related capital reduction. At the first hearing, objectors to the proposal, including ASIC and the Attorney-General of New South Wales, spoke against the scheme. The Court was also presented with 11 reports from financial and actuarial experts in relation to the extent of possible future asbestos liabilities faced by CSR. Stone J declined to make the orders convening the members’ meeting on the basis that there was significant uncertainty surrounding the likely amount of future asbestos liabilities. After reviewing the proposed scheme, she held that she could not be satisfied that the provisions of the scheme were consistent with commercial reality, and that, if approved, the scheme would not involve an unfair or oppressive result.22 On appeal, Stone J’s decision was reversed. CSR argued, among other things, that it was inappropriate for Stone J to use the discretion given to the Court under s 411(1) to decide preliminary matters related to the proposed scheme. Keane CJ, Jacobson and Finkelstein JJ agreed. Instead, Keane CJ and Jacobson J considered it was appropriate for the Court to refuse to convene a meeting under s 411(1) when ‘the making of the order would be futile because the scheme as proposed is unlikely to be finally approved: However, their Honours continued: ‘The hearing before the learned primary judge was an interlocutory hearing ill-suited to the kind of in depth investigation which both sides sought to press on this Court. We are respectfully of the opinion that the key to the determination of the appeal lies in understanding that whether or not the scheme should ultimately be approved by the court is a question not amenable to resolution in the negative on an application for an order concerning a meeting of shareholders.22 Finkelstein J made similar comments, suggesting that the function of the Court at the first hearing is ‘emphatically not’ to consider the merits or fairness of the proposed scheme. In the absence of clear evidence that the scheme is unlikely to be approved, the role of the Court is to allow the meeting to be convened and to consider any objections if and when the scheme is approved and brought back to the court. The creditors’ meeting At the court-convened meeting, the scheme must be approved by a special majority of creditors or members as defined in s 411(4). In the case of a meeting of creditors, or a class of creditors, this means approval by a majority of creditors present and voting either in person or by proxy who are owed at least 75 per cent of the total amount of debts or claims of all the creditors present at the meeting in person or by proxy. In other words, the scheme must be approved by a simple majority of creditors that are owed at least three-quarters of the total debts of those present or voting by proxy at the meeting. Where separate meetings of different classes of creditors need to be held, s 411(5) deems these meetings to be a single meeting for the purposes of the Act. This means that the votes cast at each meeting are aggregated to ascertain the overall position taken by the creditors. To determine if there are different classes of creditors, it is necessary to consider the varying rights of the creditors. For example, it is common to hold separate meetings of secured and unsecured creditors, and between different classes of unsecured creditors. The need to adopt a practical approach to this question was noted by Finkelstein J in the Ones Prime Case!21 as follows: The creditors’ meeting ‘The application of the relevant test involves a comparison of the rights creditors have in the absence of the scheme and any new rights that are established under the scheme ... [Practical considerations are relevant. If the charge is too insidious in identifying classes, it is possible to end up with any number of classes. In the end schemes of arrangement are propounded in a business context. The judge should adopt a practical businesslike approach to the issue as with the creditors if they were to decide the matter.!% The notice to creditors about the meeting must be accompanied by an explanatory statement (s 412(1)). The court approves the explanatory statement at the first hearing, when it orders the convening of the meeting. It must explain the effect of the scheme and compromise or arrangement of creditors’ rights; state any material interests of the directors or creditors of the company, and the effect of these interests on the compromise or arrangement; and set out any other material relevant to creditors making a decision. The second hearing At the second hearing, the scheme approved by the creditors is put to the court for approval. The court has discretion to refuse to approve the scheme even where a majority of the creditors has approved the scheme.1% A key focus of the court in determining this issue will be whether the scheme is commercially appropriate. In other words, a court is not likely to approve a scheme that does not return the company to solvency. The court can also impose conditions or make alterations to the scheme of arrangement (s 411(6)). Termination of a scheme In most cases, the time for termination of the scheme will be stipulated in the scheme document. For example, a scheme might terminate after a set period of time, after distribution of the payments to creditors, at the discretion of the administrator, or if the creditors of the company resolve that the scheme has attained its purpose. understanding that whether or not the scheme should ultimately be approved by the court is a question not amenable to resolution in the negative on an application for an order concerning a meeting of shareholders. The creditors’ meeting too insidious in identifying classes, it is possible to end up with any number of classes. In the end schemes of arrangement are propounded in a business context. The judge should adopt a practical businesslike approach to the issue as with the creditors if they were to decide the matter.!% The second hearing Voluntary administration was introduced in 1992 as a process that can be used by creditors where they consider they can achieve more return on their debts if the company, or part of it, continues to trade, or if its assets are sold in a process that does not involve immediate liquidation2% It was introduced following recommendations by the Australian Law Reform Commission in the Harmer Report.°> The Report noted the key benefits of voluntary administration as being that it is capable of swift implementation; is generally uncomplicated, inexpensive and flexible; and that it provides an alternative form of dealing with the financial affairs of the company‘ Since its introduction, the process has been subject to criticism, largely on the basis it is too costly and complicated for small business.1% Data indicated that its use declined significantly after 2007, when creditors’ voluntary liquidations became easier to achieve. For example, in 2006, voluntary administrations made up 35 per cent of all external administrations commenced in that year; whereas, in 2018, they made up 17.5 per cent2%8 In March 2020, the Federal Government made temporary changes to the voluntary administration scheme to support businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.1%2 These measures had a positive impact for many small businesses, with a 46 per cent decrease in the number of companies that went into administration in March to July 2020 compared to the same period in 20201 As a result, the small business restructuring process was introduced, discussed below. Even with this reform, there are still calls for the process of voluntary administration to be improved. As Harris writes: Part 5.3A has operated without major structural amendments for over 25 years. During that time, it has been used to address the financial distress of thousands of MSMEs [micro, small and medium businesses], as well as restructure some of the largest and most complex businesses in Australia. The procedure can work well, and is working well in many instances, but that appears largely to be due to the ingenuity of practitioners and the flexibility of the courts. Voluntary administration requires a range of tasks to be undertaken and imposes various obligations and potential liability risks for administrators that contribute to a cost structure that makes it unworkable for many (mostly smaller) businesses. These measures can hinder commercial restructuring efforts, but it is also clear that many businesses in financial distress are simply not viable candidates for corporate rescue !!2

## 15.40.05 Commencing a voluntary administration

The role of an administrator is to investigate the financial affairs of a company to decide what is the best course of action for its creditors. If the administrator considers a better financial return can be achieved for creditors by not proceeding directly to liquidation, they can recommend a deed of company arrangement (DOCA) be approved and entered into. In 2023, in evidence provided to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, ASIC reported that, of the 700-1,200 voluntary administrations undertaken each year, approximately 35 per cent progress to a DOCA1 Some of the common provisions included in a DOCA are that there is a moratorium on creditors enforcing their debts to allow the company more time to pay; that a compromise is entered into where the creditors agree to accept a lesser amount in final settlement of their debts; and/or that there is longer time allowed for the sale of the company’s property. Voluntary administration is commenced in one of three ways. First, a company may appoint an administrator via a board resolution stating that, in the opinion of the directors, the company is insolvent, or is likely to become insolvent at some future time, and that an administrator should be appointed (s 436A(1)). Second, under s 436B(1), a liquidator or provisional liquidator of a company may, by writing, appoint an administrator if they think that the company is insolvent, or is likely to become insolvent at a future time. The liquidator can only appoint themselves, or someone else from their firm, as the administrator with the approval of the company’s creditors and the leave of the court (s 436B(2)). Third, a secured creditor with enforceable security over all, or substantially the whole, of the company’s property may by writing appoint an administrator if the security interest has become, and is still, enforceable (s 436C(1)). In practice, the decision to put a company into voluntary administration is usually made by the company’s directors. In making this decision, the directors do not need to seek the approval of shareholders, creditors, or the court. However, they do need to believe the company is insolvent or is likely to become insolvent at some future time. In the 2019 case of Bryan Kevin Hughes as joint and several liquidators of Traditional Therapy Clinics Ltd (In liq), the Supreme Court of Wactarn Auctralia hald that nat all diractore naad ta have ciich an aninian far the racaliitinn ta ha valid 114 Tha caca invinlvad tha camnany (Traditinnal Even with this reform, there are still calls for the process of voluntary administration to be improved.1!! As Harris writes:

## 15.40.05 Commencing a voluntary administration

In practice, the decision to put a company into voluntary administration is usually made by the company’s directors. In making this decision, the directors do not need to seek the approval of shareholders, creditors, or the court. However, they do need to believe the company is insolvent or is likely to become insolvent at some future time. In the 2019 case of Bryan Kevin Hughes as joint and several liquidators of Traditional Therapy Clinics Ltd (In liq), the Supreme Court of Western Australia held that not all directors need to have such an opinion for the resolution to be valid. The case involved the company (Traditional Therapy Clinics Ltd), which had five directors. While all the directors voted in favour of a resolution that the company was insolvent or likely to become insolvent, and that an administrator should be appointed, two of the directors were new to the board and did not have enough knowledge to make an informed opinion on the issue of solvency. The Court held that the words ‘in the opinion of directors voting for the resolution’ referred to the opinion of the majority of directors. It noted that the alternate approach would leave open the possibility of sabotage by a director after the appointment of an administrator by arguing that they had never formed an opinion regarding the solvency of the company.1!5 It also noted that ‘[tlere is nothing in pt 5.3A which compels a court to take a rigorous and technical view of the appointment process. The whole exercise must necessarily be a matter of commercial judgment/11S Avoluntary administration begins as soon as an administrator is appointed (s 435C(1)). The effect of an administrator being appointed is that, while the normal operations of the company continue: (a) the directors cannot use their powers!“ and they must help the administrator, including providing the company’s books and records, and a report about the company’s business, property, affairs and financial circumstances, as well as any further information about these that the voluntary administrator reasonably requirel8 (b) unsecured creditors cannot begin, continue or enforce their claims against the company without the administrator's consent or the court's permission1!2 (c) owners of property used or occupied by the company, or people who lease such property to the company, cannot recover their property!22 (d) except in limited circumstances, secured creditors cannot enforce their security interest in the company’s assets!21 (e) a court application to put the company in liquidation cannot be commenced;!22 and (f) a creditor holding a personal guarantee from the company’s director or other person cannot act under the personal guarantee without the court's consent.123 These restrictions are designed to give the administrator time to conduct their investigation into the financial state of the company, without interference. There are benefits for directors in voluntary administration. One of the most important is that, once an administrator is appointed, directors may have a defence to any liability under the insolvent trading provisions of the Corporations Act (s 588H(5), discussed further in Chapter 11 at Section 11.25). Even if the company is subsequently wound up, the court will have regard to any action the directors took to appoint an administrator, when that decision was taken, and the results of that process in determining whether the directors are personally liable under the insolvent trading provisions (s 588H(6)). In addition, a guarantee provided by a director to cover the debts of the company cannot be enforced after an administrator is appointed without court approval (s 440J(1)). It has been held that s 440J(1) does not apply to halt an action to enforce a guarantee commenced before the company went into administration. This inter- (b) unsecured creditors cannot begin, continue or enforce their claims against the company without the administrator's consent or the court's permission!!2 (c) owners of property used or occupied by the company, or people who lease such property to the company, cannot recover their property!22 (d) except in limited circumstances, secured creditors cannot enforce their security interest in the company’s assets!2! (e) a court application to put the company in liquidation cannot be commenced;!22 and There are benefits for directors in voluntary administration. One of the most important is that, once an administrator is appointed, directors may have a defence to any liability under the insolvent trading provisions of the Corporations Act (s 588H(5), discussed further in Chapter 11 at Section 11.25). Even if the company is subsequently wound up, the court will have regard to any action the directors took to appoint an administrator, when that decision was taken, and the results of that process in determining whether the directors are personally liable under the insolvent trading provisions (s 588H(6)). In addition, a guarantee provided by a director to cover the debts of the company cannot be enforced after an administrator is appointed without court approval (s 440J(1)). pretation was applied in Mizuho Bank Ltd v Mark Anthony Ackroyd. In this case, the plaintiff bank lent a company over $44 million and took a guarantee for approximately half of that amount from the defendant director, Mr Ackroyd. In June 2016, the bank commenced proceedings against Ackroyd to enforce the guarantee. In July 2016, the company appointed administrators under s 436A of the Corporations Act. Ackroyd brought an application seeking a stay of the proceedings related to the guarantee on the basis the administrators were precluded from continuing without leave of the court under s 440J. The New South Wales Supreme Court held that s 440J did not prevent a creditor from proceeding to enforce a guarantee commenced before the voluntary administration. The Court’s decision was based on a finding that the words in s 440J did not cover a continuation of proceedings, and there was a relevant distinction between the appointment of an administrator that could trigger liability under a guarantee, and continuing proceedings that had already commenced to enforce a guarantee. Only a registered company liquidator can be appointed as an administrator (s 448B). Since 2017, the requirements for approval by ASIC are set out in sch 2 of the Corporations Act: (Insolvency Practice Schedule (Corporations) (IPSC)), s 20-5 onwards. These requirements are discussed further in Chapter 16. There is a restriction on creditors, auditors, or officers of the company becoming the administrator, even if they are registered liquidators, without leave of the court (s 448C). The administrator must lodge a notice of their appointment with ASIC by the end of the business day following their appointment and publish a notice of appointment in a national newspaper or daily newspaper that circulates in the jurisdictions in which the company carries on its business within three days. Once appointed, an administrator is required to act in the best interests of the creditors and be independent. They are also defined in s 9 of the Act as officers of the company, and subject to the duties under ss 180-84, discussed in Chapters 10 to 13.

## 15.40.10 The administrator's role

An administrator is an officer of the company (s 9AD(d))125 The central function of an administrator is to investigate and report to creditors on the company’s business, property, affairs and financial circumstances. As a result of this investigation, they can recommend one of three options to the creditors. These are: to end the administration and return the company to the directors’ control; to approve a DOCA under which the company will pay all or part of its debts and then be released from those debts; or wind up the company and appoint a liquidator (s 438A). Under s 437A, the administrator is provided with wide-ranging powers including the power to perform any function and exercise any power that the company or its officers previously performed or exercised. The administratar can ramnua a diractar fram office and annaint naw dirartare: avaciita daciimante bring ar dafand lanal nracaadinae an hahalf af tha camnani: and Only a registered company liquidator can be appointed as an administrator (s 448B). Since 2017, the requirements for approval by ASIC are set out in sch 2 of the Corporations Act: (Insolvency Practice Schedule (Corporations) (IPSC)), s 20-5 onwards. These requirements are discussed further in Chapter 16. There is a restriction on creditors, auditors, or officers of the company becoming the administrator, even if they are registered liquidators, without leave of the court (s 448C). The administrator must lodge a notice of their appointment with ASIC by the end of the business day following their appointment and publish a notice of appointment in a national newspaper or daily newspaper that circulates in the jurisdictions in which the company carries on its business within three days. Once appointed, an administrator is required to act in the best interests of the creditors and be independent. They are also defined in s 9 of the Act as officers of the company, and subject to the duties under ss 180-84, discussed in Chapters 10 to 13.

## 15.40.10 The administrator's role

An administrator is an officer of the company (s 9AD(d)).125 The central function of an administrator is to investigate and report to creditors on the company’s business, property, affairs and financial circumstances. As a result of this investigation, they can recommend one of three options to the creditors. These are: to end the administration and return the company to the directors’ control; to approve a DOCA under which the company will pay all or part of its debts and then be released from those debts; or wind up the company and appoint a liquidator (s 438A). Under s 437A, the administrator is provided with wide-ranging powers including the power to perform any function and exercise any power that the company or its officers previously performed or exercised. The administrator can remove a director from office and appoint new directors; execute documents, bring or defend legal proceedings on behalf of the company; and terminate employment contracts (s 442A). In undertaking its investigations, the administrator must determine whether the company, or any part of its business, is viable or whether it should be liquidated. If the administrator considers that part of the business should be saved, they can start to negotiate a recapitalisation plan, including the sale of all or some of the company’s assets. To enable the administrator to carry out their role, there is a moratorium or stay on any claims being taken against the company and its assets. This includes a stay of all legal proceedings against the company and the guarantors of its debts (ss 440A-AJ). However, the court or the administrator can consent to claims by secured creditors continuing (s 440B(2)). Further, any secured creditor with a security interest over all, or substantially the whole, of the property of the company can still enforce the security interest within 13 days of the administration beginning, or within 13 days of the secured creditor having been given notice of the administrator's appointment (s 441A)226 The reason for this exception to the rule that claims against the company are stayed is that there is little point in a secured creditor with such a large interest in the company’s property having to wait until the administration ends to enforce their security interest. It also avoids unnecessary delay and costs if a secured creditor has already decided they are going to enforce their security at the end of the administration process, rather than engage in the process and potentially enter into the DOCA. Under s 443A(1), the administrator is personally liable for all debts incurred in the course of the administration, including for services rendered to the company, goods bought by the company, and property leased by the company. However, under s 443D, the administrator has a right of indemnity against the company’s assets for debts incurred in exercising their powers during the administration, including payment of their own remuneration. This indemnity takes priority over all the company’s other unsecured debts. As a matter of practice, administrators will ensure a company has sufficient assets to discharge this debt before commencing the administration.

## 15.40.15 Creditors’ meetings The first creditors’ meeting

There are two mandatory creditors’ meetings involved in an administration. The first creditors’ meeting must be held within eight business days of the appointment of the administrator and provides an opportunity for creditors to decide on two key issues, the first of which is whether to pass a resolution re-

## 15.40.15 Creditors’ meetings The first creditors’ meeting

There are two mandatory creditors’ meetings involved in an administration. The first creditors’ meeting must be held within eight business days of the appointment of the administrator and provides an opportunity for creditors to decide on two key issues, the first of which is whether to pass a resolution removing the administrator and appointing someone else to act in their place (s 436E(4)). Creditors might choose to remove an administrator if they consider the administrator is too sympathetic to the company’s management or lacks independence for some other reason. However, ascertaining such issues can be difficult due to the short time period between calling the meeting and the meeting itself. The second issue that can be decided at the first creditors’ meeting is whether to appoint a committee of inspection and, if so, who are to be the committee's members (s 436E(1)). The purpose of a committee of inspection is to advise and assist the administrator (Insolvency Practice Schedule (Corporations) s 80- 35)422 The committee may obtain specialist advice or assistance and the external administrator is required to have regard to any directions given to them by the committee but is not required to follow those directions (/PSC ss 80-50, 80-35(2)). If the administrator decides not to comply with a direction of the committee, they must keep a written record of that fact and their reasons for not complying (IPSC s 80-35(3)). Only creditors can vote at creditors’ meetings (Insolvency Practice Rules (Corporations) r 75-85).128 To be entitled to vote as a creditor, the person's debt or claim has to have been admitted wholly or in part by the administrator; or the person has to have lodged particulars of their debt or claim with the person presiding at the meeting or named as having authority to receive particulars; or, if required, the person has to have lodged a formal proof of debt or claim (/PRC r 75-85(3)). At creditors’ meetings, if the number of persons entitled to vote exceeds two, a quorum consists of at least two persons present in person or by proxy or attorney (IPRC r 75-105(2)(a)). If only one person is entitled to vote, or if only two persons are entitled to vote, a quorum consists of that person or those persons present in person or by proxy or attorney (IPRC r 75-105(2)(b)). Unless a poll is demanded, voting is done verbally. IPRC r 75-110 allows a poll to be requested by the chairperson of the meeting or by a creditor participating and entitled to vote at the meeting. Unless a poll is requested, the chairperson must declare that the resolution has been passed, or passed unanimously, or passed by a particular majority, or lost‘on the voices’ (IPRC r 75-110(3)). On a poll, a resolution is passed if a majority of the creditors who are voting vote in favour of the resolution and a majority value of the creditors who are voting vote in favour of the resolution (/PRC r 75-115(1)). It is necessary that both of these requirements are satisfied for a resolution to be passed; however, the chairperson has a casting vote. The votes counted on a poll include votes cast by a creditor personally, by proxy or by attorney. Notice for creditors’ meetings must be given to in writing to as many creditors as practicably possible. Such notice must include a proxy form (IPRC r 75-25) and detail the particulars of any electronic means of participation that will be available to creditors (IPRC r 75-35). The time and place of the meeting must be convenient to the majority of creditors (IPRC r 75-30) and notice of the meeting must be lodged with ASIC. The second creditors’ meeting The second creditors’ meeting must be held within five business days before or after the end of the ‘convening period’, which is defined as 20 business days Fram tha dass afine tha adminicteatar ic annaintad fe 020A) Tha court ie aiian nauine uindare A20N(6\ ta avtand tha canuaning nariad Than avtanciane a0, The second creditors’ meeting The second creditors’ meeting must be held within five business days before or after the end of the ‘convening period’, which is defined as 20 business days from the day after the administrator is appointed (s 439A). The court is given power under s 439A(6) to extend the convening period. These extensions are common in complex administrations; however, the administrator must make out a proper case for an extension. For example, in Re Harrisons Pharmacy Pty Ltd (admins apptd) (recs and mgrs apptd),22 an extension of six months was sought by an administrator of a group of companies involved in pharmacy and medical businesses. Receivers and managers had been appointed by the secured creditors and were in support of the extension. In granting the extension, Farrell J noted that six months was a long time for an extension, and that ‘the court must consider the appropriateness of the time sought’ Farrell J summarised the relevant considerations when granting the extension, including that the extension should be for no longer than is required, that it can result in employees being unsettled or looking for other employment, and that it can expose the assets of the company to market risk.21 Her Honour noted that ‘[iJt was the intention of the legislature that the Administrations be conducted expeditiously42 In Re Autodom Ltd (admins appt) (recs and mgrs apptd),!3 an application was made for an extension for four months on the basis that the administrators were experiencing difficulties in formulating a suitable recommendation for the creditors. The employees and a landlord (Mr Hajosa) opposed the application for the extension. Hajosa argued that, due to the s 440B moratorium, it could not take possession of property it had leased to the company. Hajosa argued that the extra cost of prolonging the administration (estimated by Hajosa to be around $200,000) should be taken into account by the Court when deciding whether or not to extend the convening period. McKerracher J agreed and considered an extension would result in a lower return overall to creditors and cause real prejudice to the employees and Hajosa. Instead, the Court granted an extension of seven days to enable the administrators to convene the second creditors’ meeting in accordance with their statutory obligations. Anotice of the second creditors’ meeting must be published in a national newspaper or a daily newspaper that circulates in each jurisdiction in which the company has its registered office or carries on business. This notice must be published at least five business days before the creditors’ meeting. A written notice must also be sent to as many creditors as possible. The failure to notify a person who might have been a creditor does not invalidate the meeting.=4 Prior to the second creditors’ meeting, the administrator must provide the creditors with a report that complies with the requirements of the /PRC. It must include: (a) a report on the company’s business, property, affairs and financial circumstances (b) a statement setting out whether, in the administrator's opinion, it would be in the creditors’ interests for the company to execute a deed of company arrangement, for the administration to end, or for the company to be wound up (c) reasons for that opinion The second creditors’ meeting

(c) reasons for that opinion (d) any other information known to the administrator that will enable the creditors to make an informed decision about each of the three options (e) whether there are any voidable transactions in respect of which money, property or other benefits may be recoverable by a liquidator under pt 5.7B of the Corporations Act (f) if a deed of company arrangement is proposed—details of the proposed deed.122 The creditors are not bound to accept the administrator's recommendation. At the heart of their decision will be the question of whether liquidation or administration is likely to produce a better outcome for them. Once a decision is made, the company transitions from voluntary administration to either liquidation or a deed of company arrangement. The administration will cease if the creditors decide the company should be wound up. ADOCA will only be chosen as an option by creditors when it appears the company, or part of its business, can be saved, or creditors believe they can achieve a better return from this process than from having the company wound up. A DOCA may be proposed by any person for consideration at the creditors’ final meeting, but is usually proposed by the administrator, the directors, or a major shareholder. The DOCA can cover any issues the proposer considers appropriate. This flexibility allows the deed to be drafted to suit the needs and circumstances of the company and its creditors. For example, a deed may propose an extension of the moratorium on the debts of the company, and/or a reorganisation of the company’s business with part of the business being sold. A DOCA can include a variation of the secured and/or unsecured creditors’ rights to enforce their debts. A common provision in a deed is that creditors will accept less than full payment for their debt and that such payment can be made in instalments. Under s 444A(4), a deed must contain:
the name of the administrator what property of the company is to be available to pay creditors’ claims the nature and duration of any moratorium on the company’s debts the extent to which the company is to be released from its debts the conditions (if any) for the deed to come into or continue in operation the circumstances that cause the deed to terminate the order in which any money available to creditors will be distributed among creditors bound by the deed the day on or before claims must have arisen if they are to be admissible under the deed. The full deed does not need to be presented to the creditors at the second meeting, but the main details of the proposal must be outlined. If a deed is approved, then the administrator and the company have 15 days to execute the deed. This time can be extended by the court. The administrator responsible for the voluntary administration becomes the administrator of the deed, unless the creditors choose to appoint someone else (s 444A(2)). If a deed is not executed within the required time, the administration terminates according to s 446A, and transitions to a creditors’ voluntary winding up (see Chapter 16).

## 15.45.05 The administration

Under the administration, the DOCA ‘is binding on all unsecured creditors for claims arising on or before the day specified in the deed, which must not be later than the date when the administration began’ (s 444D). Creditors will be bound by the terms of the DOCA, even if they vote against it, with the exception of secured creditors (s 444D(2)), owners and lessors (s 444D(3)), who may vote against the DOCA and will not be bound by it, unless the court orders that they should be bound (s 444F). Such an order may be made in relation to a secured creditor when allowing them to deal with the security would have a material adverse effect on achieving the purposes of the deed, having regard to whether the DOCA will protect their security adequately (s 444F(3)). The DOCA is binding on the company, its officers and members, and the administrator. Under s 447A, ‘any person who is bound by the DOCA cannot, without court permission, apply to have the company wound up; start legal proceedings against the company; or prosecute any enforcement process against the company’s property’. Generally, only creditors with claims against the company which would be provable on winding up are entitled to be part of a DOCA.!22 This includes claims that are ‘present or future, certain or contingent, ascertained or sounding only in damages’28 and claims in tort and for damages based on statutory provisions.32They do not include costs orders which are made after the administration begins, or future personal injury claims.142 Acompany subject to a DOCA must include in every public document and negotiable instrument where the company’s name appears that the company is ‘subject to deed of company arrangement’ (s 450E(2)). Failure to comply with this requirement can attract a fine or imprisonment. However, a contravention of this section does not render invalid anything done or omitted to be done under pt 5.3A (ss 450E(4)-(5)). Meetings of creditors may be convened ey the deed administrator throughout the time that the DOCA is in operation (/PRC r 75-10). A deed administrator Perr tH Tart aro Hiny TH et RO ERA Under s 444A(4), a deed must contain: the name of the administrator winding up (see Chapter 16).

## 15.45.05 The administration

Under the administration, the DOCA ‘i er than the date when the administration began’ (s 444D). Creditors will be bound by the terms of the DOCA, even if they vote against it, with the exception binding on all unsecured creditors for claims arising on or before the day specified in the deed, which must not be latof secured creditors (s 444D(2)), owners and lessors (s 444D(3)), who may vote against the DOCA and will not be bound by it, unless the court orders that they should be bound (s 444F). Such an order may be made Meetings of creditors may be convened by the deed administrator throughout the time that the DOCA is in operation (/PRC r 75-10). A deed administrator may be obliged to convene a meeting in particular circumstances; for example, where a committee of inspection directs the deed administrator to convene a Meetings of creditors may be convened by the deed administrator throughout the time that the DOCA is in operation (/PRC r 75-10). A deed administrator may be obliged to convene a meeting in particular circumstances; for example, where a committee of inspection directs the deed administrator to convene a meeting, or creditors with at least 25 per cent in value direct the deed administrator in writing to convene a meeting (/PRC r 75-15). ASIC may also require the deed administrator to convene a meeting of creditors (IPRC r 75-20). The rules governing these meetings are the same as the rules for the first and second creditors meeting discussed above.

## 15.45.10 Setting aside a DOCA

Under s 445G, the court has the power to declare either a DOCA or a provision of a DOCA void where there is doubt, based on specific grounds, whether the deed was entered into in accordance with pt 5.3A of the Corporations Act. Such an order can be applied for by the deed administrator, a member of the company, a creditor, or ASIC. The court can declare the DOCA valid, despite any contravention of the Corporations Act, provided it is satisfied that the Act was substantially complied with and no injustice will result from a person being bound by the deed. The court has a discretion under s 445G in deciding whether to set aside a deed. In Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v PDDAM Pty Ltd,141 the Court, in deciding not to set aside a deed, took into account the fact that such action would likely result in costly litigation; would not confer any practical benefit on any of the creditors (including the Tax Office); would impose hardship on employees who would lose their benefits under the deed; and that the deed was not opposed by any other creditor than the Tax Office.!42 The Court confirmed that, even where a deed is not entered into in accordance with the Corporations Act, a court can still refuse to declare the deed void where no injustice flows from the breach. A similar power exists under s 445D, which allows a court to terminate a DOCA on a number of grounds including: where false or misleading information about the company’s business, property, affairs or financial circumstances was given to the deed administrator or to the creditors and this information can reasonably be expected to have been material in the creditors’ decision whether to support the DOCA (s 445D(1)(a)) where false or misleading information was contained in the report that accompanied the notice of the second meeting of creditors (s 445D(1)(b)) where there was an omission in the report sent to the creditors and it can reasonably be expected that this omission would have been material to the creditors in deciding whether to support the DOCA (s 445D(1)(c)) where a person bound by the deed has engaged in a material contravention of the deed (s 445D(1)(d)) effect cannot be given to the deed without causing injustice or undue delay (s 445D(1)(e)) the deed or a provision in it, or an act or omission done in relation to it, would be oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, one or more creditors; or contrary to the interests of the creditors as a whole (s 445D(1)(f)) the deed should be terminated for some other reason (s 445D(1)(g)). An order under s 445D can be applied for by a creditor, the company, ASIC or any other interested person including the administrator of the deed (s 445D(2)). If an order to terminate a deed is made under s 445D, the company is deemed to have passed a special resolution to have the company wound up. The court has a discretion under s 445D whether to make an order terminating a DOCA even where one of the grounds listed in the section applies. In Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Comcorp Australia Ltd," it was argued that important information had been omitted from the deed administrator's report. The inThe court has a discretion under s 445D whether to make an order terminating a DOCA even where one of the grounds listed in the section applies. In Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Comcorp Australia Ltd,/43 it was argued that important information had been omitted from the deed administrator's report. The information concerned the role of directors in litigation taking place in the Supreme Court. Sundberg J held that failure to set out these details was a contravention of s 439A(4)(c) and a material omission within the meaning of s 445D(1)(c). However, in determining whether the deed should be set aside, Sundberg J considered that the relevant question was whether the creditors would have voted differently had the omitted information been included. He concluded that the creditors would not have voted differently, and that there was nothing to show that it was in the interests of the creditors to terminate the deed.44 An appeal against this decision by the Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation was refused.! In commenting on the argument that the information omitted from the administrator's report was important, Carr J noted: ‘The Commissioner's submissions do not pay sufficient regard to commercial practicality. Part of his submission is that those who seek deeds of company administration (in this case the directors) have ample opportunity to prepare the information before entering into the administration. Sometimes that may be so, but the submission assumes that insolvency rarely occurs suddenly. The Commissioner's argument that the law provides a mechanism for an administrator to obtain extensions of time is, in my view, not persuasive. The Courts do not grant such extensions of time as a matter of course. Good reason must be shown, otherwise Parliament's intention, [to provide a more expeditious and less expensive way of assisting those creditors and members than under the greater formality of a winding up], might be thwarted46 One of the grounds for terminating a DOCA is where its effect, or the effect of ‘any act or omission done or proposed to be done under it, would be oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, one or more of the creditors; or contrary to the interests of the creditors as a whole’ (s 445D(1) (f)). This provision allows the court to consider any unfairness imposed by a DOCA on a particular creditor or creditors and allows the court to set aside a DOCA where such unfairness exists. It follows that this provision can be used by minority creditors against DOCAs that operate to the benefit of majority creditors. Sydney Land Corporation Pty Ltd v Kalon Pty Ltd'“2 involved an application under s 445D by Sydney Land Corporation, as one of eight creditors of the defendant company that had voted against entering a DOCA. Pursuant to the deed, the Sydney Land Corporation, which was owed $2.1 million by Kalon Pty Ltd, was entitled to a payment of $440,000, or 40 million shares in a New Zealand corporation, whose shares appeared to be worthless. The plaintiff argued that the deed was oppressive and unfairly prejudicial to it and sought to terminate the deed pursuant to s 445D(1)(f). The evidence presented to the Court indicated that the amount likely to be received by the creditor under the DOCA was less than if the company was liquidated. Young J held it was necessary to examine the whole effect of the DOCA and assess its unfairness, if any, to the Sydney Land Corporation. It was also necessary ‘The Commissioner's submissions do not pay sufficient regard to commercial practicality. Part of his submission is that those who seek deeds of company administration (in this case the directors) have ample opportunity to prepare the information before entering into the administration. Sometimes that may be so, but the submission assumes that insolvency rarely occurs suddenly. The Commissioner's argument that the law provides a mechanism for an administrator to obtain extensions of time is, in my view, not persuasive. The Courts do not grant such extensions of time as a matter of course. Good reason must be shown, otherwise Parliament's intention, [to provide a more expeditious and less expensive way of assisting those creditors and members than under the greater formality of a winding up], might be thwarted.46 Young J held it was necessary to examine the whole effect of the DOCA and assess its unfairness, if any, to the Sydney Land Corporation. It was also necessary to consider the interests of other creditors, the company, and the public. He noted that: [W]hen one is looking at what is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial under s 45D, one looks at it in the background of the general right of a creditor to be paid or to wind the company up, or to have the company administered by the administrator under the deed in a way which keeps the company’s business going and will see the creditor paid something out of the property of the company. If a scheme in a deed deviates from that, then the creditor is more easily able to say that it is operating oppressively, than otherwise 48 On the basis of these considerations, Young J found that the deed was oppressive. In particular, he noted that the Sydney Land Corporation and the other creditors were not likely to be better off under the DOCA than under liquidation; the deed required the Sydney Land Corporation to continue to have a commercial relationship with people in whom it had no confidence; the deed administrator would not have control over the assets or the entities which would make the payment to the plaintiff; and under the DOCA, the claim of creditor was not against the deed administrator but was against a foreign corporation over which the deed administrator did not have any control.!42 In Lam Soon Australia Pty Ltd (admin apptd) v Molit (No 55) Pty Ltd,15° the Federal Court considered whether a DOCA was unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, one of Lam Soon’s creditors. Molit (No 55) Pty Ltd (‘Molit’) had leased the Central Market Plaza supermarket in Adelaide from Lam Soon Australia Pty Ltd (‘Lam Soon’) on 1 July 1990. The premises were not returning a profit for Lam Soon, but another property in North Adelaide was. By 31 December 1994, Lam Soon’ liabilities exceeded its assets by over $4 million. Lam Soon was advised to appoint an administrator and enter a deed of company arrangement. The deed administrator recommended that the Central Market Plaza supermarket be closed, with the result that the lease to Molit was cancelled. The deed administrator also recommended that all of Lam Soon’s other creditors continue to be involved with the company through its other supermarket in North Adelaide. Ata meeting of creditors, Molit was the only creditor to vote against the resolution. At first instance, Branson J made an order under s 445D(1)(f) terminating the DOCA on the ground that it was unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly discriminatory to Molit11 She noted that a DOCA may still be valid notwithstanding that there is different treatment of classes of creditors;/52 however, such differentiation must be justified on reasonable grounds. Lam Soon appealed to the Full Federal Court and argued that the DOCA was not oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to Molit as it would receive at least as much creditor is more easily able to say that it is operating oppressively, than otherwise “8 Ata meeting of creditors, Molit was the only creditor to vote against the resolution. At first instance, Branson J made an order under s 445D(1)(f) terminating the DOCA on the ground that it was unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly discriminatory to Molit11 She noted that a DOCA may still be valid notwithstanding that there is different treatment of classes of creditors;/42 however, such differentiation must be justified on reasonable grounds. Lam Soon appealed to the Full Federal Court and argued that the DOCA was not oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to Molit as it would receive at least as much under the arrangement as it would receive on winding up the company. It further argued that Molit was in a better position under the DOCA, as it would be paid promptly and would not have to compete with secured creditors. It argued that different treatment of the creditors was justified on the grounds that the debts to Molit were incurred after those of the other creditors, and the other creditors were either statutory bodies or suppliers with whom the company could have ongoing dealings. The Full Federal Court allowed the appeal and remitted the case to Branson J. In making its decision, the Court noted that, where a business comprises two. parts—one that is profitable and one that is not—it would be surprising if a DOCA did not discriminate between creditors that could have an ongoing relationship with the profitable part of the business, and those that could not13 The Court stated: Where the basis of a deed of company arrangement is a proposal that an unprofitable part of a company’s business be closed and a profitable part continued it is inevitable that there will be a degree of discrimination between those creditors who will have a continuing relationship with the company and those whose relationship with the company will be terminated. The fact that there will be some degree of discrimination in such circumstances is not necessarily unfair and does not necessarily mean that the deed is not for a purpose authorised by s 435A.154 The crucial issue in this case was whether the DOCA was unfairly prejudicial to Molit. Determining this issue involved considering whether the other creditors were likely to be paid more under the DOCA than they would receive on a winding up, or whether Molit was likely to receive less under the DOCA than it would on winding up. These issues had not been fully reported by the administrator, and the effect of that issue needed to be decided by the first instance judge.15> In Helenic Pty Ltd (as trustee of the Mastrantonis Family Trust) v Retail Adventures Pty Ltd (admins apptd),1=* the New South Wales Supreme Court set aside a DOCA on the basis it was prejudicial to creditors who had voted against it. The DOCA involved Retail Adventures Pty Ltd (‘RAPL’), which had operated over 260 retail discount stores including Crazy Clarks, Sam's Warehouse, Go-Lo Discount Stores and Chickenfeed. The company also employed nearly 500 staff. Administrators were appointed in October 2012, and between the first and second creditors’ meetings the administrators entered an agreement to sell the business as a going concern to DSG Holdings Pty Ltd (‘DSG’). DSG was a company related to RAPL. A condition of the sales agreement was that a court order would be obtained to extend the convening period for the second creditors’ meeting for a period of not less than 180 days. The Federal Court granted this extension. When the second meeting of creditors of RAPL was convened, Bicheno Pty Limited, the ultimate holding company of RAPL, proposed in a DOCA that the unWhen the second meeting of creditors of RAPL was convened, Bicheno Pty Limited, the ultimate holding company of RAPL, proposed in a DOCA that the unsecured creditors accept payment from a deed fund of $5.5 million, and that claims against the directors and third parties be released. The effect of this agreement was that creditors would receive repayments of their debt at 6 cents in the dollar. In the administrator's opinion, the likely return to creditors in a liquidation would be between 20.7 and 45.1 cents in the dollar. The administrators recommended liquidation. However, the DOCA was approved at the creditors’ meeting, mainly due to the votes of a large number of creditors related to RAPL, including some of the company’s directors. Some of the unsecured creditors then applied to the Court for an order that the DOCA be set aside and that RAPL be wound up. Robb J found that the resolution approving the DOCA was prejudicial to the interests of the unsecured creditors who had voted against it. He noted that it was highly probable that these creditors would receive less under the DOCA than on liquidation, and that the DOCA's uncertainty increased the likelihood of further litigation.1% In determining whether the prejudice to the creditors was unreasonable, Robb J considered the possible benefits to the related creditors under the DOCA, which included releasing them from possible liability for insolvent trading and voidable transaction claims.!°8 His Honour concluded that: ‘The plaintiffs, and the other unsecured creditors who might receive 6 cents in the dollar from the deed of company arrangement, if the $5.5 million is paid into the Deed Fund, have been consciously discriminated against by the defendants on the basis of a commercial judgment as to whether their ongoing supply of products to DSG is necessary or desirable for its future operations. Accordingly, the creditors whose debts were acquired by the defendants were paid all, or substantially all, of the amounts that RAPL owed to them, while the remaining creditors were left to their fate under the proposed deed of company arrangement, which may give the 6 cents in the dollar return.82 On appeal, the Court of Appeal considered that determining whether there was prejudice to particular creditors should not be limited just to a comparison of the expected returns, but should also include considering whether a trading outcome may be preferable for the creditors as a whole. However, the Court held that expected returns from the DOCA were so much lower than the expected return on liquidation that there clearly was prejudice to the interests of the unrelated creditors.1" Where the basis of a deed ot company arrangement 1s a proposal that an unprontable part or a companys business be closea ana a profitable part continued it is inevitable that there will be a degree of discrimination between those creditors who will have a continuing relationship with the company and those whose relationship with the company will be terminated. The fact that there will be some degree of discrimination in such circumstances is not necessarily unfair and does not necessarily mean that the deed is not for a purpose authorised by s 435A.154 As mentioned above, a new restructuring process was introduced in 2021 to allow businesses with total liabilities not exceeding $1 million on the day the company enters the process (excluding employee entitlements) to access a single, streamlined process to restructure their debts. Under a new pt 5.3B of the Corporations Act, the object of the restructuring process is to allow small companies to retain control of the business, property and affairs while developing a plan to restructure with the assistance of a small business restructuring practitioner, and to enter into a restructuring plan with creditors (s 452A). In Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Pope John Hospitality Pty Ltd (restructuring practitioner apptd), Derrington J observed that the purpose of pt 5.3B was’significantly more modest’ than that of pt 5.3A (dealing with voluntary administration), as the former is ‘concerned with providing the opportunity for a restructuring plan to be put to the creditors’ and the latter ‘is concerned with attempting to save the company’!®2 A restructuring commences when the board passes a resolution stating that, in its opinion, the company is insolvent or is likely to become insolvent at some future time, and a restructuring practitioner! should be appointed (s 453B(1)). Under s 453B(2), company is not entitled to appoint a restructuring practitioner if: a) the company is already under restructuring; or c) the company is under administration; or d) the company has executed a deed of company arrangement that has not yet terminated; or e) a person holds an appointment as liquidator, provisional liquidator or administrator of the company. There are three phases to the restructuring process:

1) the initial phase, when the restructuring plan is formulated by the debtor company in conjunction with a restructuring practitioner. The company has 20
business days to send its restructuring proposal to creditors after the date the restructuring practitioner is appointed (although this can be extended by the restructuring practitioner);

2) the interim phase, when creditors are asked to vote in writing on the restructuring plan. All unsecured debts which were incurred prior to the company en-
tering restructuring are included in the restructuring plan. A plan is accepted if more than 50 percent of the creditors by value vote to accept the plan;

3) the final phase, when the plan has been approved and the company is operating under it

The restructuring plan sets out how the company’s creditors will be repaid if the plan is approved. For example, the plan might state how creditors will be repaid as a proportion of the debt owing to them, or as the cents in the dollar they will receive. The plan must be accompanied by a restructuring proposal statement, which includes a schedule setting out the company’s creditors, and the amount they are owed by the company.1® If the plan is not accepted, the restructuring of the company under the Corporations Act ends. The company may seek to use an alternative formal insolvency process (such as liquidation or voluntary administration). Once the restructuring process is underway, the company stays in control of the process, and may undertake transactions that are in the ordinary course of business (s 453K). Payments are made to the company’s creditors in accordance with the terms set out in the plan. A moratorium is also applied on unsecured creditor claims and some secured creditor claims. This means: a) unsecured creditors cannot begin, continue or enforce their claims (s 454C); b) owners of property (other than perishable property) used or occupied by the company, or people who lease such property to the company, cannot recover their property (s 454L; reg 5.3B.30); c) there are limits on the circumstances when secured creditors can enforce their security interest in the company’s assets (s 453K); d) a creditor holding a personal guarantee from the company’s directors or their relatives cannot act under the personal guarantee without the court's consent (s 453W); and e) ipso facto clauses (which are triggered during insolvency-related events) are stayed for some contracts (s 454C). tinen adeniccihin sundae tha alan 166.165 PA rence rrenatien a) the company is already under restructuring; or The restructuring plan sets out how the company’s creditors will be repaid if the plan is approved. For example, the plan might state how creditors will be repaid as a proportion of the debt owing to them, or as the cents in the dollar they will receive. The plan must be accompanied by a restructuring proposal statement, which includes a schedule setting out the company’s creditors, and the amount they are owed by the company."® If the plan is not accepted, the restructuring of the company under the Corporations Act ends. The company may seek to use an alternative formal insolvency process (such as liquidation or voluntary administration). When a company has paid off its obligations under the restructuring plan, it is released from all debts or claims that were admissible under the plan.1® If a company leaves the plan before it has made all the payments under the plan, it remains liable for the original debt owed prior to the plan commencing, mi- nus any repayments that occurred under the plan.1&2 While the new restructuring procedures is simpler that voluntary administration, with fewer reporting obligations and no requirement for creditor meetings, there are questions whether it is sufficiently simple or streamlined to achieve its goals. As Harris and Symes note, the process may still be ‘costly for companies, risky for practitioners and potentially unrewarding for creditors a) the company is already under restructuring; or The restructuring plan sets out how the company’s creditors will be repaid if the plan is approved. For example, the plan might state how creditors will be repaid as a proportion of the debt owing to them, or as the cents in the dollar they will receive. The plan must be accompanied by a restructuring proposal statement, which includes a schedule setting out the company’s creditors, and the amount they are owed by the company." If the plan is not accepted, the restructuring of the company under the Corporations Act ends. The company may seek to use an alternative formal insolvency process (such as liquidation or voluntary administration). As mentioned at the start of this chapter, in July 2023, the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services released its report into corporate insolvency in Australia. The overriding conclusion of the Committee was that Australia’s corporate insolvency system is too complex, hard to access and unnecessarily costly. It noted that: While reforms introduced following the 1988 ALRC Report 45 (Harmer Report) were cutting-edge at the time, the committee is concerned that Australia’s insolvency system may not reflect modern business practice and needs. This is particularly the case for smaller and medium-sized businesses. It also appears that the insolvency system has not kept pace with changes in the Australian and global economy since the Harmer Report, including but not limited to the shift from fixed assets to intangibles and increasing levels of secured debt. The committee also notes evidence suggesting Australia may have also fallen off the international pace in terms of insolvency reform.122 The Committee noted that the most common causes of company failure include under capitalisation, cash flow, financial controls and record-keeping, trading losses, strategic management, and economic conditions.1" It also noted that, typically, when an insolvent company in Australia is liquidated, unsecured creditors receive minimal returns.122 The main recommendation of the Committee was that there should be a comprehensive review focused on the harmonisation and simplification of Australia’s corporate and personal insolvency laws. This chapter focused on the formal processes of external administration provided for under pts 5.2, 5.1 and 5.3A of the Corporations Act. It explained the processes of receivership, schemes of arrangement, voluntary administration and restructuring. Receivership involves a secured creditor who has security over some or all of the company’s assets appointing a receiver. The main role of the receiver is to collect and sell the company’s charged assets to repay the debt owed to the secured creditor. Schemes of arrangement and voluntary administration can allow a business, or part of it, to continue trading or to secure a better return for creditors than on winding up. The restructuring process allows the directors of a small company to retain control of the company’s business while developing a plan to restructure the debts owed to creditors. 1 parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia, Corporate Insolvency in Australia (Report, 12 July 2023). 2 Australian Law Reform Commission, General Insolvency Inquiry (Report 45, 1988) (‘the Harmer Report’). 3.4 member's voluntary liquidation, discussed in Chapter 16 at Section 16.40.05, can only take place when a company is solvent, and is the exception to this position. 4 See, eg, Corporations Act s 436A. 5 Re Kerisbeck Pty Ltd (1992) 10 ACLC 619, 621. § Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9) (2009) 39 WAR 1. The Bell Group litigation is discussed in detail in Chapters 12 and 13. Z Ibid [1090]. 8 Sandell v Porter (1966) 115 CLR 660. 2 Ibid 670. 1° Lewis v Doran (2005) 219 ALR 555. ny 12 Aquisite Pty Ltd v Moss [2023] FCA 410 [203]. 23 Southern Cross interiors Pty Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (2001) 53 NSWLR 213, [30], [31]. 16 Re Kerisbeck Pty Ltd (1992) 10 ACLC 619, 621. 12 Southern Cross Interiors Pty Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (2001) 53 NSWLR 213, 224-5. 18 As discussed in Bank of Australasia v Hall (1907) 4 CLR 1514; Sandell v Porter (1966) 115 CLR 666, 670. 12 Hymix Concrete Pty Ltd v Garritty (1977) 13 ALR 321, 328. 22 Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) s 588E(3). 21 Ibid ss 286(1), 588E(4)(a). 22 Ibid ss 286(2), 588E(4)(b). 23 Chapter 16 also discusses winding up of solvent companies, and this chapter acknowledges that it is possible for receivership and voluntary administration to result in something other than the total failure of the company and its business. For the majority of insolvent companies engaging in external administration, however, this is not the case. 24 australian Law Reform Commission, General Insolvency Inquiry (Report No 45, 1988) (‘the Harmer Report’). 23 Ibid [33]. ty Ibid. 22 P Spender, ‘Scenes from a Wharf: Containing the Morality of Corporate Law’ in F Macmillan (ed), International Corporate Law Annual (Hart, 2000) vol 1, 65. 28 See Chapter 8 for detailed information on debt capital and Section 8.20.15 for a discussion of charges. 22 Corporations Act s 51C. 30 Automatic crystallisation based on a predetermined event, requiring no further intervention by the creditor, has been subject to some mixed reactions in the courts: see, eg, Stein v Saywell (1969) 121 CLR 529; Fire Nymph Products Pty Ltd v Heating Centre Pty Ltd (1988) 14 NSWLR 460. 21See, eg, Corporations Act ss 441A, 441C. 22 The Insolvency (Tax Priorities) Legislation Amendment Act 1993 (Cth) removed the Commissioner of Taxation’s priorities in relation to a number of taxes that a receiver was obliged to pass on but a mortgagee in possession was not. 33 According to s 90 of the Corporations Act, a receiver is also a manager if they manage or, under the terms of their appointment, have the power to manage. This definition is extended to all controllers’ under s 9. 34 Re Manchester & Milford Railway Co; Ex parte Cambrian Railway Co (1880) 14 Ch D 645, 653. 35 Receivers were originally the realm of the courts of equity; however, modern appointments in relation to company debtors typically occur through the security agreement entered into between the parties. For further background information on receivers, see J O'Donovan, Company Receivers and Administrators (Thomson Reuters, 2012).
