# Chapter 8 Corporate finance 8.05 Introduction 8.10 The concept of capital

## 8.10.05 Sources of corporate finance and the consequences 8.15 Share finance

## 8.15.05 The legal nature of a share

## 8.15.10 Types of share finance

## 8.15.15 Classifying shares

8.20 Debt finance
## 8.20.05 Sources of debt finance
## 8.20.10 Debentures
## 8.20.15 Security interests and charges
8.25 Maintenance of capital 8.30 Dividends
## 8.30.05 When can a company pay a dividend?
## 8.30.10 Payment of dividends
8.35 Alteration of share capital 8.40 Self-acquisition and control of shares 8.45 Reduction of share capital

## 8.45.05 Reasons for reducing share caj

## 8.45.10 Regulating reductions of caj

## 8.45.15 Protecting interests affected by a reduction

## 8.45.20 Reductions of share capital and class rights 8.50 Share buy-backs

## 8.50.05 Problems and advantages of buy-backs

## 8.50.10 Reaulation of share buv-backs O Loading. Please wait

In this chapter, we examine the law relating to corporate finance, focusing on how companies raise capital by issues shares or taking on debt. We examine the nature of share finance (including different types of shares), the different forms of debt finance (including debentures), and the nature of security interests. We consider share capital transactions including dividends, alterations and reduction of capital, share buy-backs and financial assistance transactions. This area of corporate law uses specific terminology. We define these terms in the text, noting that other sources, such as legal and business glossaries, may also assist. (2) Loading. Please wait

In this and subsequent chapters, frequent reference is made to the concept of a company’s capital. The meaning of ‘capital’ varies depending upon the context: According to the context the word may mean wealth, a factor or means of production, the value of those means of production, the net worth of a business enterprise, the present value of a future sequence of receipts, money, the money value of assets and possibly other things as well. Capital is thus thought of in physical terms, in value terms and in money terms. The main aspect of capital to understand here is the distinction between share capital (also known as‘equity’) and debt capital. Share capital is raised by a company issuing shares. Under s 124(1), a company has the legal capacity and powers of an individual including the power to issue and cancel shares. This includes the power to issue bonus shares, preference shares and partly-paid shares (s245A(1)). Under the replaceable rule s 198A, it is the board that has the power to decide on issuing shares. Except for bonus shares, shares are issued by a company in return for an issue price that is paid by the person purchasing the shares. Shares provide shareholders with benefits such as dividends and the right to vote in company meetings. A company can issue shares on terms that provide that the shareholder does not have to pay the full issue price at the time the shares are issued. If shares in a company are partly-paid, the shareholder is liable to pay the remaining amount owed on the shares if called upon by the company to do so up to the amount of the issue price and in accordance with the terms of the offer (s 254M(1)).2 The legal relationship between the company and its shareholders is complex. It is often said that shareholders ‘own’ the company, although this is not legally correct. Shareholders do not have rights to any part of a company or its property. Rather, a share is a ‘chose in action’ with certain features including the right to:

+ be bought and sold, used as security and passed on via a will
* vote at the company’s general meeting
* participate in dividends, and
* participate in the distribution of surplus assets when the company is wound up.2

Ultimately, however, the rights and liabilities of shareholders are determined by the terms of the share issue, the company’s constitution and the provisions of the Corporations Act. The legal nature of a share is discussed further at Section 8.15.15. By comparison, ‘debt capital’ refers to borrowings by the company. The legal relationship between the company and a lender is that of debtor and creditor and is largely regulated by contract law. Importantly, lenders do not become members of the company that they provide finance to and usually do not have voting rights in the company. Their claims are against, not in, the company.4 However, the relationship between a company and its creditors may be subject to statutory regulation. For example, when the company raises debt through issuing debentures, the Corporations Act requires that certain disclosures be made. Likewise, when a loan is secured, the Personal Property Securities Act 2009 (Cth) may apply. This is dealt with at Section 8.20.15. Different types and sizes of company will have different needs for finance and different ways of raising it. Small companies may need small amounts of capital borrowed from financial institutions, such as banks, on short-or medium-term loans. For some companies, capital raising will be a once-off process, while others will have a continuing demand. The company must also decide whether it needs short, medium-or long-term finance. There are many different sources of finance available to companies. This chapter focuses on the most common forms of finance within the categories of share and debt capital. The main consequence of a company raising finance by issuing shares is that the suppliers of the finance—the shareholders—become members of the company. For this reason, equity funding is used for longer-term financing. As discussed in Chapter 3, shareholders bear the risk that they will lose their invest-

## 8.15.05 The legal nature of a share

The share is one of the basic elements of corporate law. However, there is some uncertainty about the legal nature of shares. In ordinary usage, a‘share’ is taken to give each shareholder a recognised proprietary interest in a company. However, in law this is not strictly correct as share ownership does not create any legal interest in the assets of the company. Instead, shares give shareholders particular rights in the company as well as representing an amount of the company’s capital. As stated by Lord Wrenbury in 1923, shares represent’a fractional part of the capital’> But a share does not give the shareholder any proprietary interest in the company’s property, nor does it give proportionate ownership of the company itself The company is the owner of its property. Under s 1070A(1), a share is personal property that can be transferred and is capable of devolution via a will or by operation of law. As an item of property, the share is distinct from the company’s property. This means that, subject to any limitations imposed by a constitution, a shareholder can sell their shares without transferring any property interest in the company’s assets. Under English law, a share is a‘chose in action’? A chose in action is personal property that cannot be enjoyed by physical possession but is enforceable by legal action. Debts, patents, and copyright are included in this category. Similarly, shares are regarded as an intangible form of personal property. This allows shares to be transferred (bought and sold), used as security, and devolved by a will The general law developed these characteristics of a share and they are now expressed in s 1070A. The juridical nature of a share was debated by commentators after the High Court's judgment in Gambotto v WCP Ltd.2 As discussed in Chapter 5, this case involved the compulsory acquisition of shares pursuant to amendments to the company’s constitution. The case provoked considerable controversy and led to a debate in the literature about the legal and normative elements of shares and shareholding12

## 8.15.10 Types of share finance

The Corporations Act does not prescribe a minimum amount of share capital as a prerequisite for registration or operation of a company. A company can be incorporated with only one share. The Act also does not prescribe a minimum issue price for the shares issued. A company can issue shares on such terms, and with such rights and restrictions, as it determines (s 254B(1)). When we refer to ‘a company issuing shares; it is usually the board of directors who exercise this power. However, there are important instances when members’ approval is required for decisions about share capital, as discussed further below. The word ’shares’ is not defined in the Corporations Act, but it falls within the broader category of ‘securities’ which is defined in s 92 as including ‘shares in a body’ The concept of securities’ is discussed further in Chapters 17 and 19. Prior to 1998, the Corporations Act required a company limited by shares to state in its constitution the amount of share capital with which the company was to be registered (the company’s authorised share capital) and to divide this into shares of a fixed amount (the share's par value). This requirement no longer exists (see s 254C),1! although it is open for a company to include in its constitution a limitation on the number of shares to be issued. This might be appropriate where the company’s initial shareholders want to limit the further issue of shares and guard against later dilution of their interests in the company.2 When a company issues shares, it can determine the issue price and whether the shares are to be fully or partly paid at the time of issue. Relevant factors in determining the price of shares include the need to make the shares attractive to initial investors, having regard to the company’s current and future market value and the rights attached to the shares. One consequence of this is that a company may issue shares at one time for a certain price and with certain rights, and later, as a result of profitable trading, issue shares with the same rights but at a higher price. A key point to understand here is that the issue price of a share will not necessarily be the same as the market price. The issue price is the amount the company receives as consideration for the share. The market price is the price at which the current owner of the shares can sell those shares. The market price will be affected by many factors, only one of which is the original issue price of the share. Where a company is not performing well, it is possible that the value of its shares will fall below the issue price of those shares —equally, the reverse may happen. The total value of the shares issued to shareholders is known as the company’s ‘issued or subscribed capital’ In theory, this figure is of interest to creditors. Corporate law operates on a simplified model of corporate finance that assumes that the amount of capital raised via shares is then converted into fixed and circulating assets, which the company uses to conduct its business. If the company were to be wound up, the subscribed capital represents the maximum amount availThe power to issue shares with different rights is derived from s 254B(1). A company must notify the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) when it divides shares into different classes if the shares were not previously so divided (s 246). While the Corporations Act uses the expression ‘class of shares; it offers little assistance in defining the term. Section 57 states that where shares in a company are not divided into two or more classes then all of the shares are taken to constitute one class. The question of whether share capital is divided into different classes often arises when the rights attached to one group of shares are varied. This is discussed in Chapter 5. From the cases discussed in Chapter 5, we can learn more about defining classes of shares. In Crumpton v Morrine Hall Pty Ltd," for example, there was no express reference in the company’s constitution to different classes of shares. There was, however, a provision which prescribed how rights could be altered if the company did have classes of shares. The issue was whether this procedure should have been followed. Jacobs J held that if some shares can meaningfully be differentiated from other shares by reference to the rights they offer, then they are different classes of shares. In Clements Marshall Consolidated Ltd v ENT Ltd, Neasey J confirmed this approach by saying that the expression ‘class of shares’ refers to’a category of shares which differs sufficiently in respect of rights, benefits, disabilities, or other incidents, as to make it distinguishable from any other category of shares, if there are any, in the capital structure of the company’12 Even if only one shareholder has shares with different rights, they can still be a class of shares.18 ASIC has provided guidance on when shares are regarded as being in the same class: —that is, where:

(a) precisely the same rights, obligations and other incidents are attached to each of them; or (b) any difference in rights, obligations or other incidents is temporary and can be compensated for by a simple and certain adjustment in cash? In the same Regulatory Guide, ASIC states that:

Classes in this context are distinguished only by differences in the rights and obligations attached to the [shares] rather than by differences in how particular persons can use the rights when the [shares] come into their hands. Differences in the rights exercisable by particular shareholders are not differences between classes of [shares], even if, for some purposes, they distinguish classes of shareholders22 There is no legal restriction on the type or number of classes of shares that may be created by a company, nor the rights attached to them. In structuring share capital, companies are free to respond to investment trends, taxation incentives and other factors. We next look at some recognised classes of shares. Ordinary shares

Ordinary shares are the standard reference point when discussing corporate share capital. Where all shares in a company are of one type, they are classified as ordinary shares. This is a residual category, covering those shares that are not classifiable in another category of shares. However, ordinary shares may be divided into different classes, according to differences in voting and other rights attaching to those shares. Preference shares

The word ‘preference’ is a descriptor term, meaning that these shares generally have rights to priority, or preference, over ordinary shares on matters such as repayment of capital, participation in surplus assets and profits, and dividend entitlements (s 254A(2)). However, the Corporations Act does not define the term ‘preference share’ and it is not possible to identify a standard form of preference share. The best way to think about preference shares is as a hybrid security with characteristics of both a share and debt. A hybrid security has the characteristics of an interest-bearing security (debt) and an equity. As such, they are useful instruments of corporate finance The principal appeal of hybrids is they ‘allow issuers to “cherry pick” the aspects of debt and equity financing that satisfy their particular objectives’22 For example, while preference shareholders often get priority in the payment of any dividends or surplus assets, they usually have restricted voting rights. Section 254A(2) requires that before a company allots preference shares it must set out in its constitution, or in a special resolution, the rights of the holders of those shares regarding repayment of capital, participation in surplus assets or profits, dividends, voting, and priority in relation to other shares. Ordinary shares Preference shares

In Re Capel Finance Ltd, the shares in a new share scheme were described as ‘redeemable preference shares’ (discussed further below).22 This meant that the holders of the shares could ‘redeem’ them by notice in writing to the company. However, the preference shares did not carry any priority or preference (as against the holders of existing or future classes of shares) in the repayment of capital; on winding up; in the profits of the company; or in voting or attending the general meetings of the company. Barrett J held that these shares, if issued, would not be preference shares. A preference share is a share with some preference or priority over ordinary or common shares. It is not possible for ‘preference shares’ to exist except as a result of a process of differentiation from shares which are not ‘preference shares. These shares did not carry any priority in respect of the matters identified in CA s 254A(2) or any other matters.”4 In Beck v Weinstock, the High Court held that the question of what is a ‘preference share’ is to be answered by reference to the rights set out in the constitution. The majority stated: Ifa company’s [constitution] provided that shares of an identified class carried some right with respect to repayment of capital, participation in surplus assets or profits, cumulative or non-cumulative dividends, voting, or priority of payment of capital or dividend which preferred the holder of a share of that class over the holder of some other class of share for which the [constitution] provided, those shares were preference shares.2° In that case, the company had a provision in its constitution which allowed it to issue 14 classes of shares. Classes ‘A’ to ‘D’ were described as ‘preference shares’ Classes ‘E’ to‘N’ were described as ‘ordinary shares’ Certain shares that fell within the description of preference shares were issued but no ordinary shares were ever issued. The question for the High Court was whether preference shares could be issued when no ordinary shares had ever been issued. The High Court ruled that the disputed shares had rights which preferred the holder of those shares over the holder of any ordinary share in the company. The fact that no ordinary shares were ever issued did not deny the shares from being preference shares. While preference shares are legally regarded as part of a company’s share capital, when the rights of preference shareholders are compared with those of ordinary shareholders the position of preference shareholders is more like that of creditors.22 In cases where the interests of ordinary and preference shareholders conflict, the courts have tended towards a strict approach in interpreting the rights of the preferential shareholders.22 A company may convert an ordinary share into a preference share, or a preference share into an ordinary share (s 254G). In doing so, there must be compliance with the Corporations Act dealing with the variation of class rights. The conversion of ordinary shares to preference shares requires that the rights of the A company may convert an ordinary share into a preference share, or a preference share into an ordinary share (s 254G). In doing so, there must be compliance with the Corporations Act dealing with the variation of class rights. The conversion of ordinary shares to preference shares requires that the rights of the shareholders regarding repayment of capital, participation in surplus assets and profits, dividends, voting, and priority over other shares be set out in the constitution, or be approved by a special resolution of the company (s 254G(2)). Redeemable preference shares

Some preference shares are issued on the basis that they may be redeemed by the company before winding up. This means that the company may repay the holders of those shares the amount they paid for them. This repayment may happen at a fixed time, on the happening of a particular event, at the company’s option, or at the shareholder's option (s 254A(3)). The effect of this is that redeemable preference shares are like quasi-loans of capital to the company, with the shareholders still benefitting from any dividend entitlements prior to their shares being redeemed. Despite the similarity with debt capital, redeemable preference shares are regarded as part of a company’s share capital. However, Hill observed that the ‘modern’ redeemable preference share ‘is designed to give greater protection to the investor/shareholder, thereby further assimilating [their] position with that of the secured creditor’22 Redeemable preference shares represent an exception to the principle that a company must preserve its share capital. The main concern here is that because capital is being handed back to shareholders, the interests of creditors may be adversely affected. For this reason, the Corporations Act sets constraints on the issue of redeemable preference shares. First, a preference share is only redeemable if it is issued on that basis. A non-redeemable share cannot subsequently be converted into a redeemable share (s 254G(3)). Second, the shares can only be redeemed on the terms on which they have been issued. Once redeemed, the shares are then cancelled (s 254J(1)). Third, the moneys used for redemption must come from the profits of the company or from the proceeds of a fresh issue of shares made for that purpose, and the redeemable preference shares must be fully paid up at the time (s 254K). A failure to comply with the preconditions for redemption attracts the operation of the civil penalty provisions (s 254L). Employee shares

Employee shares are a way to achieve greater levels of employee participation in the company’s business. The employer company offers shares to its employees (usually at less than the market price) to provide an incentive to increase the company’s profits and reinforce a link between the success of the business and the work of the employees. As a result, there may be restrictions on the employees’ capacity to dispose of shares. ASIC supports the operation of such schemes where the terms are designed to achieve interdependence between the employer and its employees for their long-term mutual benefit 22 Bonus shares
ance with the Corporations Act dealing with the variation of class rights. The conversion of ordinary shares to preference shares requires that the rights of the shareholders regarding repayment of capital, participation in surplus assets and profits, dividends, voting, and priority over other shares be set out in the constitution, or be approved by a special resolution of the company (s 254G(2)). Redeemable preference shares Employee shares Bonus shares

A company has the power to issue bonus shares (s 254A(1)). The Corporations Act describes these as shares where no consideration is payable to the issuing company (s 254A(1)(a)). It has been held that:

‘The essential characteristic of a bonus share is that it is paid for, not by the shareholder, but by the capitalisation of an amount standing to the credit of one of the company’s accounts or reserves.2! Bonus shares are often given to shareholders instead of (or as well as) dividends and are given in amounts which are proportionate to the member's existing shareholding. They need not be issued to all shareholders—this will depend upon the constitution. If a company raises debt finance by borrowing funds, the creditors do not become members of the company. As discussed in Chapter 4, a distinction is drawn between voluntary creditors (usually those with a contractual relationship to the company) and involuntary creditors (for example, tort victims who have damages claims against the company). In this chapter, the focus is on voluntary creditors. There are different types of voluntary creditors, such as trade creditors who supply goods and services to the company and secured or unsecured finance creditors who supply finance to the company.

## 8.20.05 Sources of debt finance
The sources to which a company may look for debt finance, and the form which that takes, depends upon a variety of factors. Four significant factors are:

1. the size and nature of the business conducted by the company
2. the prevailing commercial and financial environment
3. the anticipated duration of the debt arrangement: is it to be a short-, medium-, or long-term?, and
4. the prevailing system of tax regulation.
Debt finance: context Astudy published in 2012 by the Reserve Bank of Australia22 provided interesting observations about the use of debt finance. The focus of the study was on financing for small business, but this type of business constitutes the highest percentage of companies in Australia. The following discussion draws on this study. The study found that incorporated businesses are more likely to use debt than unincorporated business, although smaller businesses are less likely than larger businesses to have any debt. Survey data shows that the smaller businesses tend to raise more of their debt from financial intermediaries (mainly from banks). Only the largest businesses can access debt funding directly from capital markets because the fixed costs of organising direct debt raising—for example, by debentures—are large Smaller businesses pay more, on average, for debt than both households and larger businesses. The key reason for the difference in borrowing costs is that smaller businesses are typically viewed as having more volatile revenue streams and carry more risk. Smaller businesses can make greater use of unsecured debt products and riskier forms of loan collateral, such as inventory, vehicles, equipment and accounts receivable.24 The higher cost of small business debt facilities leads many small business-owners to use household debt products to fund their business; for example, a significant percentage of small business-owners use personal credit cards to manage the business's cash flow or use residential property as loan collateral. Smaller businesses also utilise alternative sources of debt; for example, equipment and vehicle leasing.22 Another important form of alternative debt finance for smaller businesses is debtor finance, which is short-term funding in exchange for selling its accounts receivables.2® The average small business obtains up to half of its debt funding from its trade suppliers when it obtains inventory, equipment and services without immediate payment. Payment terms for trade credit agreements vary considerably between businesses and are usually determined by the relative bargaining positions of businesses and the perceived creditworthiness of the borrower22 Debt finance: instruments

The following section focuses upon the legal aspects of one form of debt finance—debentures—and the creation of security interests or charges in relation toa debt. When a company borrows money, it may be asked to acknowledge the debt in a formal document and to give security to protect the lender against the possibility of non-repayment. Where these two features are incorporated into one document, this may be described as a ‘debenture’ The obligation to give security arises in many contexts. Of particular significance for companies is the creation of charges that are a form of security over the property of the company. This is discussed below.

## 8.20.10 Debentures Definition of debentures

As the debenture-holders within a series may be a diverse group—and unable, either individually or collectively, to monitor the loan, the company’s performance or to protect their interests —a trustee is appointed to act for them (s 283AA). The trustee holds the rights under the debentures on trust for the beneficial holders. This allows the borrowing company to deal directly with the trustee rather than a large and diverse group of lenders.

## 8.20.15 Security interests and charges

When a company defaults on its obligations under a loan contract, the creditor can seek to enforce the repayment of the debt by taking legal action based upon the contract. There is a risk, however, that the creditor's claim will have to compete with, and be postponed to, the interests of other creditors. This is important when the company is approaching insolvency or has become insolvent, as discussed in Chapters 15 and 16. To avoid this situation, many large creditors protect their position by obtaining a security over the company’s assets. Sykes and Walker provide the following definition of a security: [A] security can be defined as an interest vested in a person called ‘the creditor’ in certain property owned by another called ‘the debtor’, whereby certain rights are made available to the creditor over such property in order to satisfy an obligation personally owed or recognised as being owed to the creditor by the debtor or some other person. Sykes and Walker note that this definition covers most, but not all, situations in which a security is granted.22 Because a company has the legal capacity and powers of an individual (s 124), it can give the same types of security over its borrowings as a natural person. Section 124 also recognises that companies can give security over uncalled capital. Where a company grants security over its property, it is subject to the general registration regime that applies under the Personal Property Securities Act 2009 (Cth) (‘PPSA’) as corporate property is personal property for the purposes of this Act. It is worth noting here that creditors can seek to protect their interests by other means than seeking a grant of security. It is common practice for finance creditors of small companies to require personal guarantees from the directors either in addition to or substitution for a security on a loan. In this way, a director of the company agrees to accept personal liability for the company’s loan so that, if the company defaults on the loan, the creditor can look to the guarantor/director for satisfaction of the debt. While an unsecured creditor takes the risk that the company will not be able to pay its debts, a secured creditor takes a security interest from the borrower that allows the creditor to have access to the company’s property that is the subject of the security interest in the event of the company being unable to repay its debts. The company’s property that is subject to the security interest is referred to as ‘collateral’. A’‘security interest’ is defined in s 9 of the Corporations Act to include a‘PPSA security interest’ and a charge, lien or pledge. ‘Charge’ is defined in s 9 and includes a charge within the general law meaning of a charge.‘PPSA security interest’ is defined in s 12 of the PPSA as a’an interest in personal property provided for by a transaction that, in substance, secures the payment or performance of an obligation: An important distinction in this context is between a non-circulating and circulating security interest. Prior to the PPSA reforms, these were referred to as ‘fixed’ and ‘floating’ charges. A fixed charge would attach to particular company assets—such as plant and equipment—which prevented the company from dealing with the property without the consent of the secured party. In contrast, a floating charge would float above the charged property; for example, cash, book debts, inventory, or sometimes all of the debtor's current and future property. This arrangement made it possible for the company to deal with charged property without asking permission of the secured party. A floating charge would become fixed if the company defaulted on the loan or dealt with the property in ways that were contrary to the contract creating the security. This was known as ‘crystallisation’ of the charge. Depending on the terms of the contract creating the charge, crystallisation could occur automatically without notice being given by the secured party? Under the PPSA, similar types of interests are created in the form of‘non-circulating security interests’ or ‘circulating security interests: A circulating security is a right against the company’s property that initially ‘circulates’ above a class or category of property, as opposed to ‘fixing’ to particular property? A ‘non-circulating security interest’ is a security interest in a non-circulating asset. It attaches to specific property—identified in the security agreement—owned by the company. Where a non-circulating security interest has been created, the company is not entitled to sell or otherwise dispose of the collateral free of the security interest without the secured party's consent. Registration of security interests

The PPSA establishes a publicly accessible online register of personal (including corporate) property securities (‘PPS Register’). The data in the PPS Register includes details of the reaistered security interests in personal provertv. details of the arantor in the secured party. and a description of the collateral. While rea- Registration of security interests

The PPSA establishes a publicly accessible online register of personal (including corporate) property securities (‘PPS Register’). The data in the PPS Register includes details of the registered security interests in personal property, details of the grantor in the secured party, and a description of the collateral. While registration is not compulsory, it is in the secured party’s interest to register the security interest as registration is the most common method of perfecting the security interest.41 By perfecting the security interest, the secured party may gain priority over competing security interests of third parties in the same collateral. Pri
rity rules Where two or more security interests are attached to the same property, the priority rules in the PPSA or the parties’ agreement become important. These rules determine the order in which the proceeds of sale of the collateral (or secured property) are to be distributed among the parties in enforcement proceedings. The PPSA has default priority rules, plus specific rules that apply to particular types of security interests. Priority rules may be displaced by an agreement to the contrary between the grantor and secured parties. The default priority rules are as follows:

(1) The priority between unperfected security interests in the same collateral is determined according to the order of attachment of the security interest (s 55(2)). (2) A perfected security interest has priority over an unperfected security interest in the same collateral (s 55(3)). (3) Where two or more security interests are perfected, priority is determined by the ‘priority time’ for each security interest (s 55(4)). Pursuant to s 55(5) the priority time for a security interest is the earliest of the following times: (a) the registration time for the collateral (b) the time the secured party first perfects a security interest by taking possession or control of the collateral (c) the time the security interests is temporarily perfected, or otherwise perfected, due to the operation of the PPSA. (4) A security interest that is perfected by control has priority over a security interest perfected by other means (s 57(1))42 The priority rules in the PPSA intersect with the rules that apply when a company is approaching insolvency or has become insolvent. These rules are discussed in Chapters 15 and 16.42 dealing with the property without the consent of the secured party. In contrast, a tloating charge would tloat above the charged property; tor example, cash, book debts, inventory, or sometimes all of the debtor's current and future property. This arrangement made it possible for the company to deal with charged property without asking permission of the secured party. A floating charge would become fixed if the company defaulted on the loan or dealt with the property in ways that were contrary to the contract creating the security. This was known as ‘crystallisation’ of the charge. Depending on the terms of the contract creating the charge, crystallisation could occur automatically without notice being given by the secured party32 Registration of security interests Priority rules The default priority rules are as follows:

The priority rules in the PPSA intersect with the rules that apply when a company is approaching insolvency or has become insolvent. These rules are dis- cussed in Chapters 15 and 16.42 ©) Loading. Please wait

For the remainder of this chapter, we return to share or equity finance to discuss the rules regarding the maintenance of share capital. As mentioned above, corporate law operates from a simplified model of corporate finance. This model assumes that a company raises its initial capital by issuing shares and the amount of capital raised is reflected in the number of shares issued. That capital is then converted into non-circulating and circulating assets, which the company uses to conduct its business. If the company conducts its business successfully, it will earn an amount in excess of the initial capital sum—otherwise known as profits. If the company needs further capital later, it can either use its profits, make a call on existing uncalled share capital, issue more of its shares, or borrow the money. While corporate law recognises departures from this model, it forms the basis for most legal principles regarding corporate finance. Under this simple model, the main concern of a company’s creditors“ is assumed to be ensuring the company’s issued share capital is only used in the legitimate course of business and is available to repay their loans. It is these funds that should, in theory, still be available to pay the creditors if the company was wound up. The effect of this simple model is that once a company has raised capital it is in the interests of shareholders and creditors (subject to fluctuations in the company’s performance) for the company to maintain the value of that capital. This is the principle of capital maintenance and this principle underpins the discussion in the remainder of this chapter. The case usually cited as authority for this principle of capital maintenance is Trevor v Whitworth,“ decided in 1887. The case involved a company incorporated under the Companies Act 1862 (UK). The company’s objects, as stated in its Memorandum of Association, were to acquire and then carry on the business of flannel manufacturers. The company’s Articles of Association permitted the company to repurchase its shares from members and, at the board's discretion, to sell or extinguish those shares. There was no such power stated in the Memorandum.“£ Whitworth was a deceased shareholder. His shares had been sold back to the company by his executors, but the full purchase price had not been paid. When the company was later wound up, the executors brought a claim against the liquidators for the unpaid amount. The main question before the House of Lords was whether the company had the power to purchase its own shares, as authorised in the Articles. The House of Lords held that such actions were contrary to the idea that a company should maintain its share capital in the interests of creditors. In Lord Watson's words: Paid up capital may be diminished or lost in the course of the company’s trading; that is a result which no legislation can prevent; but persons who deal with, and give credit to a limited company, naturally rely upon the fact that the company is trading with a certain amount of capital already paid, as well as upon the responsibility of its members for the capital remaining at call; and they are entitled to assume that no part of the capital which has been paid into the coffers of the company has been subsequently paid out, except in the legitimate course of its business.22 The rule in Trevor v Whitworth provides that, subject to normal commercial activity, a company must maintain its share capital. What is the rationale for this decision? Although Lord Watson portrayed the paid-up capital as something equivalent to a physical asset which must be preserved, a more convincing explanation is that the rule is tied to the boundaries of limited liability. Recall from Chapter 1 that, in the mid-nineteenth century, there was intense debate about the virtues of granting limited liability by statute. Judicial attitudes about limited liability were still cautious by the time Trevor v Whitworth was decided. The House of Lords emphasised that limited liability gives protection to shareholders by placing a limit on the amount that creditors can seek from them. In return, the Court reasoned, the interests of creditors should be protected by restricting the company’s use of the share capital to the purposes stated in the objects clause: a ‘company cannot employ its funds for the purpose of any transactions which do not come within the objects specified in the memorandum’48 The Court felt this restriction was reinforced by what was then a statutory requirement that the Memorandum should state the company’s nominal share capital. Creditors ‘have a right to rely, and were intended by the Legislature to have a right to rely, on the capital remaining undiminished by any expenditure outside these limits, or by the return of any part of it to the shareholders’? If the company was permitted to purchase its own shares, this would reduce the pool of capital available for creditors in the event of a winding up*2 Lord Macnaghten summarised this argument, stating that: [T]he notion of a limited company taking power to buy up its own shares is contrary to the plain intention of the [Companies] Act of 1862, and inconsistent with the conditions upon which, and upon which alone, Parliament has granted to individuals who are desirous of trading in partnership the privilege of limiting their liability.51 In Trevor v Whitworth and earlier cases,32 the courts sought to balance the ‘privilege’ of limited liability with the interests of company creditors. This reasoning was adopted in subsequent cases. For example, Lord Macnaghten commented in Ooregum Gold Mining Co of India Ltd v Roper, that ‘the dominant and cardinal principle is that the investors shall purchase immunity from liability beyond a certain limit, on the terms that there shall be and remain a liability up to that limit’3 Although the idea of capital maintenance delineating limited liability is laudable, the capital maintenance rule is a clumsy tool for creditor protection in modern corporate dealings. As stated by Ford, Austin and Ramsay: As a measure of creditor protection, the law of maintenance of capital is defective. For one thing, there are no significant minimum capital requirements to be met by those who wish to obtain the privilege of limited liability, and thus companies can and frequently are formed with capital of only $2. Moreover the doctrine of maintenance of capital does not provide a guarantee that the subscribed capital will remain; subscribed capital may be reduced or eliminated in the course of trading # aR In Trevor v Whitworth and earlier cases2 the courts sought to balance the ‘privilege’ of limited liability with the interests of company creditors. This reasoning was adopted in subsequent cases. For example, Lord Macnaghten commented in Ooregum Gold Mining Co of India Ltd v Roper, that ‘the dominant and cardinal principle ... is that the investors shall purchase immunity from liability beyond a certain limit, on the terms that there shall be and remain a liability up to that limit’53 Although the idea of capital maintenance delineating limited liability is laudable, the capital maintenance rule is a clumsy tool for creditor protection in modern corporate dealings. As stated by Ford, Austin and Ramsay: It could be argued that the value of share capital is largely irrelevant to most creditors of modern companies who are more concerned with cash flow and asset valuations.°> For these reasons, it is common for creditors to seek protection through contractual means where they can. This might include imposing borrowing limits on a company, obtaining security over corporate assets (discussed above), or obtaining personal guarantees from directors. Few providers of finance (such as banks) would be content to use a company’s issued share capital as the sole indicator of the company’s creditworthiness. & While the commercial context within which companies and creditors operate has become more complex since Trevor v Whitworth, the rule still forms the basis of many aspects of the modern law of corporate finance in Australia=4 Moreover, the capital maintenance rule has been surprisingly resilient, as demonstrated by comments made in 2014 by the Victorian Court of Appeal regarding the payment of dividends out of capital: ‘The prohibition was a vestigial remnant of the 19th century doctrine of the maintenance of capital whereby shareholders were entitled to assume that no part of the capital would be paid out by the company except in the legitimate course of business. Despite changes made by the Corporations Law Review Act 1998 (which included the abolition of par value and the facilitation of a reduction in share capital without court approval), transactions which affected a company’s share capital remained closely regulated 58 The rule in Trevor v Whitworth forms the historical basis of laws relating to the following: the determination and payment of dividends self-acquisition and control of shares share capital reductions share buy-backs financial assistance in the acquisition of shares. These topics are discussed in the remainder of this chapter. However, as we go through these topics it will become apparent that they also raise important questions about corporate control and the appropriate mechanisms for changes in that control? In many ways, the material in the remainder of this chapter is an important adjunct to the material on corporate governance which is considered in Chapters 10-13. In Trevor v Whitworth and earlier cases>2 the courts sought to balance the ‘privilege’ of limited liability with the interests of company creditors. This reasoning was adopted in subsequent cases. For example, Lord Macnaghten commented in Ooregum Gold Mining Co of India Ltd v Roper, that ‘the dominant and cardinal principle ... is that the investors shall purchase immunity from liability beyond a certain limit, on the terms that there shall be and remain a liability up to that limit’*3 Although the idea of capital maintenance delineating limited liability is laudable, the capital maintenance rule is a clumsy tool for creditor pro- tection in modern corporate dealings. As stated by Ford, Austin and Ramsay: the determination and payment of dividends self-acquisition and control of shares share capital reductions share buy-backs O Loading. Please wait

As investors, shareholders expect to make money either from the increase in the price of their shares or from returns in the form of dividend payments. The company may choose to pay all or part of its profits to members in the form of a dividend. In public companies, the payment of dividends attracts investors to purchase shares in the company which assists in maintaining or increasing the company’s share price. However, the market for shares in proprietary companies is usually limited, therefore dividend payments are the way that shareholders obtain financial returns on their investment. While shareholders may also be employed by small proprietary companies to derive wages or salaries, this income arises from their status as an employee, not a shareholder. Traditionally, the general meeting was required to ‘declare’ that dividends be paid under provisions in company constitutions.©° There is a distinction between a determination to pay a dividend, which is a revocable decision to fix the amount or time for payment of a dividend (s 254V(1)), and the declaration of a dividend, which immediately creates a debt (s 254V(2)). It is common for dividends to simply be determined by the company, rather than declared, because the declaration of a dividend would create a debt under s 254V(2). This is discussed further below. Modern corporate law leaves matters such as the rate of dividend payment, the form in which it may be paid, the method of payment, and related matters to be decided by the company. The replaceable rule in s 254U provides that the directors may determine that a dividend is payable and may fix the amount to be paid and the time and method of payment. Under this replaceable rule, dividends may be paid in cash, by the issue of shares, the grant of options, the transfer of assets, or some other method. In the case of proprietary companies, a wider discretion is granted by the replaceable rule in s 254W(2), which states that, subject to the terms on which shares have been issued, the directors may pay dividends as they see fit. It is important to remember that ss 254U and 254W may be replaced by a different provision in a company’s constitution. Indeed, these provisions are commonly replaced in closely-held proprietary companies, such as family companies, where the constitution may state that the consent of a particular party is required before a dividend is determined or that a dividend may only be paid if it is declared by shareholders at a general meeting on the recommendation of directors. A distinction must also be drawn between final and interim dividends. A final dividend is one which is determined to be payable (or declared) by reference to profits revealed in the company’s end-of-year financial statements. An interim dividend is one which is determined to be payable (or declared) during the company’s financial year, based upon an anticipation of profits to be shown at the end of the year. Dividend rights may vary between different classes of shares. The Corporations Act provides that, in a public company, each share in a class has the same dividend rights unless the constitution or a special resolution provides for different dividend rights (s 254W(1)). In the case of a special resolution, this would have to be passed before the issue of the shares, otherwise the variation of class rights provisions in the Corporations Act would be activated.

## 8.30.05 When can a company pay a dividend?

Traditionally, dividends could only be paid out of profit. The common law tests used to determine what constituted ‘profit’ were complex. In 2010, the profit test was replaced with a test that measures assets over liabilities, so that a dividend may only be paid if the company’s assets exceed its liabilities. Section 254T states as follows: (1) A company must not pay a dividend unless: (a) the company’s assets exceed its liabilities immediately before the dividend is declared and the excess is sufficient for the payment of the dividend; and (b) the payment of the dividend is fair and reasonable to the company’s shareholders as a whole; and (c) the payment of the dividend does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its creditors. (2) Assets and liabilities are to be calculated for the purposes of this section in accordance with accounting standards in force at the relevant time (even if the standard does not otherwise apply to the financial year of some or all of the companies concerned). As stated above, the first limb of the test in s 254T refers to ‘balance sheet’ solvency; that is, the company’s ability to pay a dividend depends on whether its assets exceed its liabilities by an amount sufficient to cover the payment of the dividend. Sections 254T(1)(b) and (c), which relate to the requirement that the payment of the dividend must be fair and reasonable and must not materially prejudice creditors, mirror similar conditions for a reduction of capital and financial assistance, which are discussed at Sections 8.45 and 8.55, respectively, below.

## 8.30.05 When can a company pay a dividend? (1) A company must not pay a dividend unless:

(a) the company’s assets exceed its liabilities immediately before the dividend is declared and the excess is sufficient for the payment of the dividend; and (b) the payment of the dividend is fair and reasonable to the company’s shareholders as a whole; and (c) the payment of the dividend does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its creditors. There are considerable uncertainties about the operation of s 254T. The most recent provision is negatively drafted and prohibits the payment of a dividend

## 8.30.05 When can a company pay a dividend? (1) A company must not pay a dividend unless:

(2) Assets and liabilities are to be calculated for the purposes of this section in accordance with accounting standards in force at the relevant time (even if the standard does not otherwise apply to the financial year of some or all of the companies concerned). There are considerable uncertainties about the operation of s 254T. The most recent provision is negatively drafted and prohibits the payment of a dividend unless the three requirements in the legislation are satisfied. However, it is not clear that a dividend is lawful just because these conditions are met. For example, it is not clear whether a payment that satisfied the test would still be valid if the company did not record a profit in the year the dividend was paid.

## 8.30.10 Payment of dividends

Once a dividend is declared, it represents a debt owed by the company to entitled shareholders. Unless there is a provision in the constitution requiring that a dividend be ‘declared; the time at which the debt arises under s 254U is when the time fixed for payment arrives. The company does not incur a debt to shareholders merely by deciding it will pay a dividend and determining the amount or time for payment. Before the time fixed for payment arrives, the decision to pay the dividend may be revoked at any time (s 254V(1)).22 The situation is different if a company has a constitution which provides for the formal ‘declaration’ of dividends. In this case, the company incurs a debt at the time the dividend is declared (s 254V(2)) and this declaration cannot subsequently be revoked.® In this circumstance, each shareholder who is entitled to receive a dividend becomes a creditor of the company, ranking behind other non-member creditors. However, the rule in s 254T still applies: a dividend may only be paid if the requirements of that section are satisfied. If there is a downturn in the company’s financial position between the date of declaration and the date of payment, a company could find itself in a position where it could not lawfully discharge its debt to the shareholders without breaching that section. From a director's point of view, the time at which the liability arises is important because incurring a debt by way of a dividend may give rise to liability for insolvent trading under s 588G, where the company is either insolvent or becomes insolvent through payment of the dividend. Section 588G is discussed further in Chapter 11 in the context of directors’ duties. Further, payment of a dividend where liabilities exceed assets may amount to an unauthorised reduction of capital, creating liability for the directors under s 256D(3). Reductions of capital are discussed below. The insolvency provisions of the Corporations Act contain other provisions relevant to the declaration of dividends by an insolvent company. For example, s 563A has the effect that any dividends that constitute a debt and are unpaid when a winding up commences will be postponed until all debts to non-member creditors have been satisfied. Winding up for insolvency is discussed in Chapter 16 and s 563A is discussed at Section 16.30. Different provisions apply when a company has paid a dividend before winding up. Where the company was insolvent at the time the dividend was paid, the

## 8.30.10 Payment of dividends
of capital, creating liability for the directors under s 256D(3). Reductions of capital are discussed below. The insolvency provisions of the Corporations Act contain other provisions relevant to the declaration of dividends by an insolvent company. For example, s 563A has the effect that any dividends that constitute a debt and are unpaid when a winding up commences will be postponed until all debts to non-member creditors have been satisfied. Winding up for insolvency is discussed in Chapter 16 and s 563A is discussed at Section 16.30. Different provisions apply when a company has paid a dividend before winding up. Where the company was insolvent at the time the dividend was paid, the Corporations Act gives the liquidator power to apply for a court order to undo the payment if it amounts to a ‘voidable transaction’®= Voidable transactions are discussed in Chapter 16. The purpose of this power is to prevent the company’s controllers from disposing of assets in favour of certain creditors to the disadvantage of the general body of unsecured creditors. These provisions attempt to balance the interests of unsecured creditors of the company with those of persons who have engaged in fair transactions with the company before winding up. It is worth noting how the law deals with payment of dividends within corporate groups. The profits of a subsidiary company, even a wholly owned subsidiary, cannot be used by a holding company as a source for the payment of dividends by the holding company. Only where a subsidiary declares and pays a dividend in favour of the holding company may the latter then use those funds.©2 On the other hand, where a subsidiary company incurs a debt by way of a dividend and the subsidiary is, or thereby becomes insolvent, then the holding company may be liable to pay the subsidiary’s debt under s 588V. Section 588V imposes liability upon holding companies for insolvent trading by their subsidiaries in certain circumstances. For further details, see Chapter 3 at Section 3.35. As discussed above, the rule in Trevor v Whitworth requires that a company maintain its share capital. However, there are occasions when a company may wish to alter aspects of its share capital by ordinary resolution passed in the general meeting. Some of the ways in which a company may seek to do this include: (1) consolidating existing shares into a smaller number of new shares or dividing existing shares into a larger number of new shares (s 254H).°8 A share division might be done to increase the proportion of a member's shareholding, so as to guarantee continued control of the company.£2 Any unpaid amounts on shares prior toa conversion are divided equally among the replacement shares (2) cancelling shares that have been forfeited, usually for non-payment of a call (s 258D).22 Neither of these types of capital alteration has implications for the rule in Trevor v Whitworth. In the case of (1), there is no change to the company’s issued share capital. Under the simple model on which Trevor v Whitworth is based, the pool of capital to which creditors can look is unaffected. In the case of a cancellation of shares, Lord Herschell stated in Trevor v Whitworth that the forfeiture of shares ‘does not involve any payment by the company, and it presumably exonerates from future liability those who have shewn themselves unable to contribute what is due from them to the capital of the company’! In the case of fully paid shares, a forfeiture which does not operate to reduce the capital of the company may be valid because a forfeiture of fully-paid shares cannot reduce a company’s nominal or issued capital 2 Other types of capital alteration do compromise the rule in Trevor v Whitworth and are closely regulated by the Corporations Act. These are discussed below. Part 2J.2 of the Corporations Act restricts a company acquiring shares in itself or a company that controls it. Except in certain limited circumstances, the Corporations Act prohibits:

* acompany directly acquiring its own shares or any right or interest in its own shares (s 259A)
* acompany taking security over shares in itself or in a company that controls it (s 259B)
+ the issue or transfer of shares or interests in shares of the company to an entity that it controls (s 259C).23

Section 259A was interpreted in U & D Coal Ltd v Australian Kunqian International Energy Co Pty Ltd:/4 see the discussion at Section 8.50.10. OC) Loading. Please wait

## 8.45.05 Reasons for reducing share capital

A reduction of share capital occurs when money paid to a company for a share is returned to the member. Despite the rule in Trevor v Whitworth, a reduction of share capital can assist a company in maintaining a profitable business and can be beneficial to creditors. Accordingly, the Corporations Act regulates, rather than prohibits, reductions of share capital. There are situations where it will be commercially desirable or economically necessary for a company to reduce its share capital. An example this is when a company decides to discontinue or reduce part of its business. The company may have surplus assets it no longer uses. This is called an ‘excess reduction’ The company pays the cash equivalent of that unneeded capital back to the shareholders in return for their shares. Alternatively, a company may have accumulated large and permanent trading losses and decided to reduce its issued share capital to a level which more accurately represents the asset-backing of the company_* This involves cancelling issued shares without a return of capital to shareholders and is called a‘loss reduction: An advantage of a loss reduction is that it enhances the company’s capacity to pay dividends on the remaining shares. A failure to pay adequate dividends can depress the market value of the shares, making the company vulnerable to a takeover offer. Another way a company can reduce its share capital is by cancelling some or all of its uncalled share capital. This type of reduction is mentioned in Note 1 tos 256B(1) and is discussed below. A reduction of share capital is one of several ways in which a company can remove minority shareholders from a company’s share register. A reduction of share capital can be used to alter the balance of control within a company.2®

## 8.45.10 Regulating reductions of capital

The legislation aims to balance the interests of shareholders with the harm that might be caused to creditors when there is a reduction of capital. This intention is stated in s 256A: ... The rules are designed to protect the interests of shareholders and creditors by: (a) addressing the risk of these transactions leading to the company’s insolvency (b) seeking to ensure fairness between the company’s shareholders (c) requiring the company to disclose all material information.

The Corporations Act regulates share capital reductions by authorising certain types of reduction, and by specifying conditions and procedures for other reductions. Authorised reductions

Some capital reductions that are specifically authorised are listed in pt 2J.1 div3 of the Act. The list covers share capital reductions which do not adversely affect the interests of creditors or shareholders, or which are sufficiently regulated by other provisions in the Corporations Act: (1) Section 258A: An unlimited company may reduce its capital in any way.

(2) Section 258B: Where the holding of shares in a home unit company gives the shareholder a right to occupy or use property owned by the company without separate consideration, this is an authorised reduction provided it is permitted by the company’s constitution (s 258B(1)). Before the introduction of strata or unit title systems, the right to occupy real property was sometimes based on holding shares in a company. A person had a right to occupy an apartment in a block of units because they held shares in a company. Similarly, the transfer of an interest in land to a person in exchange for a right of occupancy or use is an authorised reduction of capital (s 258B(2)). This commonly occurs as part of a conversion of a block of units to strata or unit title. The person surrenders the shares in return for a transfer of strata title of the apartment. The capital reduction involved in the transfer is authorised under s 258B. (3) Section 258C: A company may pay a brokerage or commission to a person in respect of that person or another person agreeing to take up shares in the company. (4) Section 258D: A company may pass an ordinary resolution to cancel forfeited shares. This is discussed above at Section 8.35.

* an 8 per cent interest in the company held by minority shareholders would be cancelled via a selective reduction of capital.

The cancellation of the shares held by the minority was approved by special resolutions passed at a general meeting and at a special meeting of shareholders whose shares were to be cancelled. The explanatory notes accompanying the notice of meeting included an independent expert's report, which valued the shares in the company differently depending on whether they were owned by majority or minority shareholders. The expert considered that the price offered for the minority shares was less than the value of the shares measured on a control basis, but more than the value of the shares measured on a minority basis. The expert concluded that minority shareholders would be better off if the proposed transactions were completed and concluded that the lower price (which assessed the value of the shares on a minority basis) was fair and reasonable. The expert justified the lower price for the minority members’ shares on the basis that those members were unable to influence the operations of the company, there was a low likelihood of the minority shareholders receiving an alternative offer, and, in the absence of the proposed transactions proceeding, the company was unlikely to have capacity to undertake programs required to enhance the profitability of the company. On this basis, the expert formed the opinion that the selective capital reduction was fair and reasonable to shareholders as a whole. Mr Elkington was a minority shareholder in Costa who claimed that the price offered for the shares was unfair and applied for an injunction under s 1324 to restrain Costa from making the capital reduction. Ferguson J dismissed the application. He held that in assessing what is fair and reasonable to the shareholders as a whole, many factors will be relevant, with the price to be paid being only one consideration. Factors that were relevant in the present case included the company’s indebtedness and inability to grow the business in the absence of the proposed transactions, the non-payment of dividends for several years, and the limited ability of the minority shareholders to otherwise sell their shares.2° Taking into account these factors, there was no reason why the shares should be valued on a control rather than a minority basis. The interests of all shareholders, not just the minority, are to be considered in determining whether the selective capital reduction is fair and reasonable. The Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill (which introduced the current s 256B) states that the factors which could be relevant to determining whether a reduction is fair and reasonable include the adequacy of any consideration paid to shareholders, whether the reduction has the practical effect of depriving some shareholders of their rights (although the test directs attention to the shareholders as a whole), whether the reduction is being used to bring about a takeover while avoiding the takeover provisions, or whether the reduction should more properly proceed as a scheme of arrangement.£2 The Explanatory Memorandum states that the fair and reasonable test directs attention to the effect of the reduction rather than its purpose, and that this avoids the application of the High Court's decision in Gambotto v WCP Ltd (‘Gambotto’s Case’)®3 to a reduction of share capital under s 256B. The application of Gambotto’s Case is raised by the similarity between the effect of a cancellation of shares in a reduction of capital and the expropriation of shares which occurred in that case. In Winpar Holdings Ltd v Goldfields Kalgoorlie Ltd (‘Winpar’), the New South Wales Court of Appeal held that the principles in Gambotto’s Case have no application to a reduction of share capital under the Corporations Act. Giles JA (Beazley JA and Davies AJA agreeing) found that the approach in pt 2J.1 was comprehensive, adding the Gambotto principles would be conflicting and confusing.®= In Winpar, Goldfields Kalgoorlie Ltd (‘GK’) called a shareholders’ meeting to approve a selective reduction of share capital via the cancellation of shares held by a minority shareholder with a payment of 55 cents per share. This was 8 cents above the value determined by an independent valuer. The effect of the capital reduction was to give the majority shareholder in GK 100 per cent ownership. Winpar was a minority shareholder and argued that the special benefits that accrued to the majority shareholder from their 100 per cent ownership should be allocated to the minority shareholders. The New South Wales Court of Appeal rejected Winpar’s argument and found there was a fair and reasonable allocation of benefits to all shareholders. The majority shareholder received the benefit of 100 per cent ownership. The minority shareholders obtained a higher price. There was no necessary unfairness or unreasonableness if the advantage was shared. THE SECOND REQUIREMENT: NO MATERIAL PREJUDICE TO CREDITORS

The second requirement is that the reduction does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to repay its creditors. This expresses the key concern underlying the rule in Trevor v Whitworth. In Re CSR Ltd,6 the Full Federal Court held that in order to prove a ‘material prejudice’ to a company’s ability to pay its creditors, the proponent must establish ‘the creation of a material as opposed to theoretical increase, in the likelihood that the reduction in capital will result in a reduced ability to pay creditors’®2 In that case, CSR Ltd (‘CSR’) commenced proceedings seeking orders pursuant to s 411(1) of the Corporations Act for the convening of a meeting of its shareholders to consider a scheme of arrangement. The scheme involved the demerger of CSR's sugar and renewable energy business to facilitate the creation of two listed companies (Sucrogen and New CSR), which was to be implemented by way of a reduction in the capital of CSR and a scheme of arrangement between CSR and its existing shareholders. Interveners in the proceedings (including ASIC and James Hardie Industries) opposed the scheme on the basis that the demerger could prejudice the prospects of recovery of damages from New CSR by persons injured as a result of their The second requirement is that the reduction does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to repay its creditors. This expresses the key concern underlying the rule in Trevor v Whitworth. In Re CSR Ltd,2° the Full Federal Court held that in order to prove a ‘material prejudice’ to a company’s ability to pay its creditors, the proponent must establish ‘the creation of a material as opposed to theoretical increase, in the likelihood that the reduction in capital will result in a reduced ability to pay creditors’®2 In that case, CSR Ltd (‘CSR’) commenced proceedings seeking orders pursuant to s 411(1) of the Corporations Act for the convening of a meeting of its shareholders to consider a scheme of arrangement. The scheme involved the demerger of CSR's sugar and renewable energy business to facilitate the creation of two listed companies (Sucrogen and New CSR), which was to be implemented by way of a reduction in the capital of CSR and a scheme of arrangement between CSR and its existing shareholders. Interveners in the proceedings (including ASIC and James Hardie Industries) opposed the scheme on the basis that the demerger could prejudice the prospects of recovery of damages from New CSR by persons injured as a result of their exposure to asbestos by CSR. CSR’s application was granted because the interveners had only established that CSR would be unable to pay its creditors ina ‘worst case’ scenario, where there was less than 5 per cent chance of the liabilities occurring.88 It was not appropriate to refuse the scheme merely on a theoretical fear of adverse consequences.®2 Section 256B requires that the prejudice be material rather than theoretical 2° THE THIRD REQUIREMENT: APPROVAL BY SHAREHOLDERS

Third, the reduction must be approved by the company’s shareholders as set out in s 256C. The method of approval depends on whether an equal or a selective reduction is proposed. An equal reduction must be approved by an ordinary resolution passed at a general meeting of the company. A selective reduction can be approved in one of two ways. One method is to pass a special resolution at a general meeting, with no votes cast in favour of the resolution by any person (or their associates) who is to receive consideration from the reduction or whose liability for unpaid capital is to be reduced. The second method is where an ordinary resolution can be agreed to at a general meeting by all of the ordinary shareholders in the company. This may be suitable for companies with a small number of shareholders. In either case, where the selective reduction involves the cancellation of shares, the reduction must be approved by a special resolution of a meeting of the shareholders whose shares are to be cancelled. The directors exercise the company’s power to reduce its share capital. The shareholders in a general meeting only have the function of approving a proposed resolution. They cannot effectuate it. Therefore, the shareholders must vote on a proposal to approve a capital reduction put forward by the directors on behalf of the company. The shareholders cannot act on behalf of the company in proposing a reduction of capital themselves.22 THE FOURTH REQUIREMENT: NOTICES AND LODGEMENT WITH ASIC

One further requirement for a selective reduction is that a copy of any of these resolutions must be lodged with ASIC, and the reduction cannot proceed until 14 days after that lodgment. For equal and selective reductions, ASIC must be sent a copy of the notice of the meeting, and any document relating to the reduction be sent to shareholders before the general meeting. Documentation sent to shareholders must include a statement that contains all the information that is material to the shareholders’ decision on how to vote. The statement does not have to include information which has previously been disclosed to shareholders (s 256C(4)). of the liabilities occurring.88 It was not appropriate to refuse the scheme merely on a theoretical fear of adverse consequences.®? Section 256B requires that the prejudice be material rather than theoretical 2° THE THIRD REQUIREMENT: APPROVAL BY SHAREHOLDERS

If any shares are cancelled in a reduction of capital, the company must lodge a notice with ASIC within one month of the cancellation. That notice must set out the number of shares cancelled, the amount paid by the company on cancellation, and the class to which the cancelled shares belong (s 254Y).2 A failure to comply with the procedures set out in s 256B may result in a civil penalty being imposed. However, the contravention of s 256B does not affect the vali ity of the reduction or of any related contracts or transactions, and the company itself is not guilty of an offence (s 256D).25 Under s 256D, a person involved in the contravention is liable under the civil penalty provisions in pt 9.4B. Section 79 explains how a person may be involved in a contravention. See below at Section 8.55.10 for a further discussion of this accessorial liability. The Corporations Act contains a number of mechanisms to protect the interests of shareholders and creditors affected by a reduction of capital. This is aimed at addressing the risk of corporate insolvency, ensuring fairness between shareholders, and requiring disclosure of all material information of the company as stated in s 256A. The interests of shareholders are protected by the notice, meeting, and resolution requirements. These procedures seek to ensure a reduction is supported by the informed consent of the shareholders. For example, in Re Allgas Energy Ltd, the Court declined to confirm a reduction of capital because new information about the reduction presented at the shareholders’ meeting had not been made available to the proxy voters.2° The statutory and general law rules regarding directors’ duties apply to a reduction of capital. This is confirmed by s 260E which states that: A director is not relieved from any of their duties under this Act (including sections 180, 181, 182, 183 and 184), or their fiduciary duties, in connection with a transaction merely because the transaction is authorised by a provision of this Chapter or is approved by a resolution of members made under a provision of this Chapter. Section 260E applies to all transactions affecting share capital that are dealt with in ch 2J of the Corporations Act. The Corporations Act deals with the protection of creditors’ interests in a reduction in a different way. The reduction process does not specifically require the approval of the company’s creditors. To some extent, the risk to creditors may be met by the combined effect of s 588G (the insolvent trading provision) and s A failure to comply with the procedures set out in s 256B may result in a civil penalty being imposed. However, the contravention of s 256B does not affect the validity of the reduction or of any related contracts or transactions, and the company itself is not guilty of an offence (s 256D).2° Under s 256D, a person involved in the contravention is liable under the civil penalty provisions in pt 9.4B. Section 79 explains how a person may be involved in a contravention. See below at Section 8.55.10 for a further discussion of this accessorial liability. Section 260E applies to all transactions affecting share capital that are dealt with in ch 2) of the Corporations Act. The Corporations Act deals with the protection of creditors’ interests in a reduction in a different way. The reduction process does not specifically require the approval of the company’s creditors. To some extent, the risk to creditors may be met by the combined effect of s 588G (the insolvent trading provision) and s 1317H which, as noted in s 256E, makes directors personally liable if the company became insolvent because of a debt incurred by a reduction of share capital (s 588G(1A)). This would not be relevant where the reduction involves a cancellation of shares. Another protection for creditors is provided by the notice and lodgement requirements described above. As explained in the Explanatory Memorandum, the requirement to lodge notice of the meeting and accompanying documents with ASIC before the meeting, coupled with the mandatory 14-day waiting period after lodgement, means creditors and other interested persons will have at least 35 days’ notice of a proposed reduction. 22 Members and creditors are given further protection by seeking an injunction and/or damages under s 1324. A person whose interests have been, are, or would be affected by a contravention of the reduction of share capital provisions may apply for an injunction. Section 1324(1A) states that the interests of a member or creditor are affected if a company contravenes the requirement that the reduction should not prejudice the ability to pay creditors. In Re Molopo Energy Ltd, it was held that if it appeared that a reduction of capital might materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its creditors and it could not be affirmatively shown that the reduction would not have that effect, then the reduction is prohibited. In other words, the onus is on the company to ensure that the reduction does not prejudice its ability to pay creditors. Further, the interests of a member are affected if the company contravenes the requirement that the reduction should be fair and reasonable. The company bears the onus of proving its conduct does not constitute a contravention. For further discussion of s 1324, see Chapter 14. A reduction of capital can be problematic where a company’s share capital is divided into different classes. One question that arises when a reduction involves a particular class of shares is whether the reduction amounts to a variation of class rights and, if so, whether ss 246B-G should apply. Certainly, the Corporations Act envisages these sections may be relevant: s 256E includes the class rights sections in its list of other provisions in the Corporations Act that may be relevant to a reduction of share capital. For a further discussion of variation of class rights, see Chapter 5. below at Section 8.55.10 for a further discussion of this accessorial liability.
## 8.45.15 Protecting interests affected by a reduction

Further, the interests of a member are affected if the company contravenes the requirement that the reduction should be fair and reasonable. The company bears the onus of proving its conduct does not constitute a contravention. For further discussion of s 1324, see Chapter 14.
## 8.45.20 Reductions of share capital and class rights ©) Loading. Please wait

A buy-back is a repurchase of shares by the company. It involves a company making an offer to shareholders to buy back their shares. The shareholder can choose whether to sell their shares or not, taking into account the circumstances; for example, the tax treatment of the buy-back relative to dividends.
## 8.50.05 Problems and advantages of buy-backs

During a buy-back, a company can diminish its financial resources by acquiring its own shares. Recall that the rule in Trevor v Whitworth arose from a company repurchasing its own shares. The judgment noted that the questions raised by share repurchases are similar to questions raised by reductions of share capital. As Lord Herschell observed, ‘the stringent precautions to prevent the reduction of the capital of a limited company, without due notice and judicial sanction, would be idle if the company might purchase its own shares wholesale, and so effect the desired result’22 However, a key difference between a reduction of shares and a buy-back is that a buy-back is optional. There are problems that can arise with share buy-backs, some of which are covered by the Corporations Act; for example:122 (1) share buy-backs could be used to discriminate unfairly between shareholders, with some members being bought out at prices in excess of the market value of the shares. This practice could result in a breach of the fiduciary duties imposed on directors, particularly the requirement that directors exercise their powers for a proper purpose.121 (2) directors might use the buy-back power improperly to maintain or improve their control of the company, or to eliminate opposing interests from the company. This conduct would involve a breach of directors’ common law and statutory duties, although those rules have not always been consistently applied in Australian courts. (3) a share repurchase power might open the door to’greenmail’!22 whereby a dissident shareholder could threaten either a hostile takeover or disruption of the company’s affairs unless their shares were bought by the company at a premium on the market price (4) there is a risk that a public company may manipulate or distort the market price of its shares by purchasing its own shares. The potential for insider trading might also increase Should each problem be dealt with by existing specific rules; for example, laws relating to fiduciary duties, or rules prohibiting market manipulation and insider trading? Or should these rules be supplemented by a general regulation of buy-backs? Australian company legislation has taken the latter course. There are many advantages for a company to repurchase its shares.°° These advantages are particularly relevant to small or closely-held companies. In this type of company, it is important to retain the control in one or two shareholders. Where a shareholder dies or leaves the company and the remaining members are not able to purchase those shares, a buy-back power provides an efficient mechanism whereby the existing power balance can be preserved. Even in large companies, it may be desirable to buy out a dissident shareholder. A share buy-back may be a defensive tactic in the face of an unwanted takeover bid. Buy-backs can be a mechanism for an efficient allocation of investment funds. For example, one benefit of a company repurchasing its own shares is that the number of outstanding shares on the market is reduced. When this happens, the relative ownership stake of each investor increases because there are fewer shares, the earnings per share increases, and this is generally followed by a spike in the share price. Therefore ‘[i]f a company has surplus funds, shareholders are given an opportunity to invest funds elsewhere to maximise return or to increase their relative holding by not accepting the repurchase offer’12% Given that there is no clear policy reason for either a blanket prohibition or the deregulation of buy-backs, the Corporations Act attempts to balance the capital maintenance principle with concerns for commercial practice. Until 1989, buy-backs were strictly prohibited in Australia. Amendments that commenced in 1990 were, in part, a response to a recommendation of the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee that corporations should be able to repurchase their own shares, subject to strict procedural controls. The current buy-back provisions are the product of amendments introduced by the First Corporate Law Simplification Act 1995 (Cth) which changed the 1990 rules because they were said to be too expensive and procedurally complicated. The purpose of the present regulations governing buy-backs is the same as that for the rules relating to reductions in share capital: to address the risk of corporate insolvency, to ensure fairness between shareholders, and to require disclosure of all material information (s 256A).

## 8.50.10 Regulation of share buy-backs

(4) there is a risk that a public company may manipulate or distort the market price of its shares by purchasing its own shares. The potential for insider trading might also increase1°

## 8.50.10 Regulation of share buy-backs

Under s 257A of the Corporations Act, a company may buy back2Z its own shares on two conditions: the buy-back must not materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its creditors, and the procedures in pt 2J.1 div 2 must be followed. The first of these conditions duplicates one of the requirements for a reduction of share capital in s 256B. It is possible for a company’s constitution to impose further restrictions or a complete prohibition on the company buying back its own shares. A buy-back may comply with s 257A but nevertheless amount to unacceptable circumstances for the purposes of ch 6 of the Corporations Act (s 657A) and the buy-back may be subject to the jurisdiction of the Takeovers Panel.22% In Re George Raymond Pty Ltd, Byrne J noted that a buy-back is a contractual agreement for the sale and purchase of shares, in which the shareholder agrees to transfer the power balance can be preserved. Even in large companies, it may be desirable to buy out a dissident shareholder. A share buy-back may be a defensive tactic in the face of an unwanted takeover bid. Buy-backs can be a mechanism for an efficient allocation of investment funds. For example, one benefit of a company repurchasing its own shares is that the number of outstanding shares on the market is reduced. When this happens, the relative ownership stake of each investor increases because there are fewer shares, the earnings per share increases, and this is generally followed by a spike in the share price. Therefore ‘[i]f a company has surplus funds, shareholders are given an opportunity to invest funds elsewhere to maximise return or to increase their relative holding by not accepting the repurchase offer’12¢

## 8.50.10 Regulation of share buy-backs
shares to the company and the company agrees to pay for them.1°2 The company incurs a debt in the amount agreed to be paid for the shares.12 The procedures in pt 2J.1 div 2 recognise four types of buy-back. Each type has its own procedures (some of which are common to all buy-backs) and these are summarised in the table in s 257B. The four types of buy-back are:

* equal access scheme
+ selective buy-back
+ employee share scheme
* on-market buy-back.
Equal access scheme An equal access scheme (defined in s 257B(2)) is a buy-back that satisfies all of the following conditions: (a) the offers under the scheme relate only to ordinary shares (that is, preference shares cannot be bought back under an equal access scheme); (b) the offers are to be made to every person who holds ordinary shares to buy back the same percentage of their ordinary shares; (c) all of those persons have a reasonable opportunity to accept the offers made to them; (d) buy-back agreements are not entered into until a specified time for acceptances of offers has closed; and (e) the terms of the offers are all the same. Section 257B(3) states that in applying s 257B(2), the following should be ignored: (a) differences that relate to shares having different accrued dividend entitlements; (b) differences in consideration attributable to the fact that the offers relate to shares on which different amounts remain unpaid; or {c) differences in the offers introduced solelv to ensure that each shareholder is left with a whole number of shares. (c) differences in the offers introduced solely to ensure that each shareholder is left with a whole number of shares. Additional approval and lodgement requirements may also apply to equal access schemes, as set out below. Approval at a general meeting

Generally speaking, a company’s power to buy back its shares is exercised by the company’s directors. Any exercise of this power will be subject to the fiduciary and statutory duties which govern the actions of directors. In certain situations, however, the Corporations Act requires shareholders in general meeting to have the opportunity to scrutinise and approve a proposed buy-back scheme. This occurs when the proposed buy-back will have the result that the company will exceed the’10/12 limit’ The 10/12 limit is reached when a company buys back 10 per cent of the smallest number, at any time in the last 12 months, of votes attaching to voting shares in the company. The calculation of the 10 per cent figure is cumulative across the last 12 months; that is, the company must count the number of voting shares that have been bought back during the last 12 months, together with the voting shares that will be bought back in the proposed buy-back (ss 257B(4), (5)). In such a situation, the equal access scheme must be approved by an ordinary resolution (s 257C(1)). Lodgement requirements

If the scheme dooes not require approval by a resolution of a general meeting—that is, if the 10/12 limit is not exceeded—then, 14 days before the buy-back agreement is entered into, the company must lodge with ASIC the terms of the offer and any accompanying documents (ss 257F, 257E). If the scheme does require the passing of a resolution, then, 14 days before the resolution is passed, the company must lodge with ASIC a notice of the meeting and any accompanying documents (ss 257F, 257C(3)), and also lodge the terms of the offer and accompanying documents (s 257E). In either case, if the company wants to act earlier than 14 days after making the required lodgements, it must also lodge a notice of intention to carry out the buy-back (s 257F). Shares cancelled Lodgement requirements Shares cancelled

Once the buy-back agreement has been entered into, all rights attaching to the shares are suspended and the shares are transferred back to the company and cancelled. A company must not dispose of shares that have been bought back (s 257H). ASIC must be notified of the cancellation under s 254Y. Selective buy-back

Acompany may engage in a selective buy-back. This type of buy-back must be approved by one of two methods (s 257D). Either a special resolution can be passed at a general meeting, in which no votes are cast in favour by any person (or their associates) whose shares are proposed to be bought back, or an ordinary resolution can be passed at a general meeting by all the ordinary shareholders in the company. For an example of the voting procedures required by ss 257B and 257D, see Re CIC Australia Ltd (No 2).!2 For the purposes of s 257D, the word ‘associates’ is defined in ss 10, 11 and 15 of the Corporations Act113 The reason for these tighter requirements is that selective buy-backs have the potential to prompt greenmail claims, or result in other inequities between shareholders.4 A related reason is that the selective buy-back power may be useful in allowing the company to buy out a dissident shareholder. In other words, selective buy-backs may be useful as a form of takeover defence. As discussed in Chapter 19, takeover defences are subject to scrutiny by legislation and common law principles in order to protect the interests of shareholders. The notice of the general meeting must be accompanied by a statement that sets out all information known to the company that is material to a shareholder's decision on how to vote. The statement does not have to include information that has previously been disclosed to shareholders (s 257D(2)). The notice and accompanying documentation must be lodged with ASIC before it is sent to any shareholder." A notice under s 257D will often include an independent expert's report as to whether the consideration offered is fair and reasonable but such a report is not mandatory, provided it can be established that shareholders have received sufficient information on the proposed buy-back to make informed decisions on the buy-back resolution1& In BPESAM IV M Ltd v DRA Global Ltd, the Federal Court granted an urgent injunction preventing a company from acting upon shareholder approval for a selective share buy-back agreement after it was discovered that there were significant errors in the company’s financial information. The Court held that the directors needed to keep shareholders informed of any material changes to the financial position of the company and that, if the company wished to proceed with the buy back, it should have gone back to the shareholders with the correct financial information. Aselective buy-back must comply with lodgement, disclosure, and cancellation requirements that are similar to those that apply to an equal access scheme (s 257D(3)). Employee share scheme buy-back

Some companies aim to encourage employee participation by allowing employees, including executive directors, to acquire shares in the company. An employee share scheme buy-back is one where the company buys shares held by, or on behalf of, employees, and this is approved at a general meeting (s 9). The requirement for approval at a general meeting is less onerous than a requirement for a resolution, because s 257B only requires a resolution (as per s 257) if the employee share scheme buy-back will exceed the 10/12 limit. Employee share scheme buy-back

Fourteen days before the buy-back is entered into, the company must lodge with ASIC a notice of intention to carry out the buy-back (s 257F), and the same rules regarding cancellation of the shares apply as for equal access and selective buy-backs. On-market buy-back

The Corporations Act permits a listed company to buy back its shares during the ordinary course of trading on a prescribed financial market (s 257B(6)). This type of buy-back must meet the same requirements regarding the 10/12 limit, notice, and cancellation of shares as an employee share scheme buy-back (s 257B(1)). On-market buy-backs are also regulated by the Listing Rules of licensed markets; for example, the ASX Listing Rules ('LRs’). In summary, the LRs require that the purchase price must not be more than five per cent above the average market price for that class of shares over the last five days on which sales in those shares were recorded.118 The use of the LRs to regulate on-market buy-backs has the advantage of greater flexibility in enforcement, but it carries with it uncertainties surrounding the status of the LRs and the role of the bodies such as ASX. This is discussed in Chapter 17. Protecting interests affected by a buy-back

As with reductions of capital, the use of the buy-back provisions may bring the operation of other sections of the Corporations Act into play, which can protect the interests of shareholders and creditors. Section 257J lists these provisions, only some of which are mentioned here. A failure to follow the mandatory buy-back procedures is a contravention of the requirement in s 259A that a company can only acquire shares in itself through the buy-back provisions. By virtue of s 259F, that contravention does not affect the validity of the acquisition, and the company is not guilty of an offence, but a person who is involved in the contravention (for example, a director) is liable under the civil penalty provisions in pt 9.4B. Section 79 explains what it means for a person to be involved in a contravention. This is discussed in further detail below at Section 8.55.10. Section 259A was interpreted in U & D Coal Ltd v Australian Kungqian International Energy Co Pty Ltd In that case, Australian Kunqian International Energy Co Pty Ltd (’KQ’) acquired shares in U & D Coal Ltd (‘UDC’) following an initial public offering (IPO). Subsequently, KQ issued a notice under s 737 of the Corporations Act alleging that the prospectus for the IPO contravened s 724 of the Corporations Act and that KQ was entitled to repayment of the subscription price for the shares. UDC contested the validity of the s 737 notice. Sections 724 and 737 are discussed in Chapter 9. Protecting interests affected by a buy-back

A failure to follow the mandatory buy-back procedures is a contravention of the requirement in s 259A that a company can only acquire shares in itself through the buy-back provisions. By virtue of s 259F, that contravention does not affect the validity of the acquisition, and the company is not guilty of an offence, but a person who is involved in the contravention (for example, a director) is liable under the civil penalty provisions in pt 9.4B. Section 79 explains what it means for a person to be involved in a contravention. This is discussed in further detail below at Section 8.55.10. The parties reached an agreement under which UDC would acquire and cancel the IPO shares from KQ. It then applied to the Court for an order under s 259A permitting UDC to acquire shares in itself under the terms set out in the settlement, including provisions that required a proposed meeting of shareholders to consider extending the same buy-back terms to other shareholders who had acquired their shares under the IPO. Sifris J held that s 259A(c) allowed a company to acquire shares in itself under a court order and there was no reason why s 259A(c) should not apply to the terms of the parties’ settlement. Although there was a possibility that other parties might be treated differently from KQ (particularly the 480 minority shareholders who had also obtained their shares under the IPO), this was not a compelling reason to withhold approval of the compromise reached between UDC and KQ. In the circumstances, there was no requirement to treat everyone the same. If the company is or becomes insolvent when the buy-back takes place, directors may be liable under the insolvent trading provision in s 588G. That section notes that entering into a buy-back agreement constitutes the incurring of a debt by the company, activating the section in situations of insolvency (s 588G(1A)). Section 588G is a civil penalty provision (see pt 9.4B). If a company contravenes the buy-back provisions by prejudicing its ability to pay its creditors (one of the requirements in s 257A), this is deemed to affect the interests of creditors who may seek an order for injunction or damages under s 1324 (s 1324(1A)). Again, the company bears the onus of establishing that its conduct did not contravene s 257A. A proposed buy-back of shares may involve a reduction of capital where the shares are paid for out of share capital. In that case, the effect of s 258E is that the company does not have to comply with the reduction of share capital provisions provided that the buy-back complies with ss 257A-J. Where a company wants to remove a select group of shareholders from its register, the result of a selective buy-back will be the same as a selective reduction of capital. A company has a choice as to which method it will use. The disadvantage of a buy-back is that its success depends upon the shareholders’ willingness to accept the buy-back offer. A proposed buy-back may involve a variation of class rights, which require attention to the provisions set out in ss 246B-G. Similarly, the takeover provisions and the related party provisions may also apply. In addition, a company contemplating a buy-back will need to ensure it will not be in breach of the prohibitions against market manipulation in ss 1041A-C. These prohibitions are discussed in Chapter 17. Finally, the statutory and general law rules regarding directors’ duties will be applicable in a buy-back, as emphasised in s 260E.120 Protecting interests attected by a buy-back (©) Loading. Please wait

## 8.55.05 The problems and benefits of financial assistance transactions

Where a company gives financial assistance to a person who is about to, or has already, purchased shares in the company, this is known as a ‘financial assistance transaction’ These transactions raise similar concerns to buy-backs. Both types of activity can adversely affect the interests of creditors, either by producing an imbalance between a company’s issued share capital and the available asset backing, or by diminishing the pool of capital available to creditors.221 A financial assistance transaction may have advantages for a company. In the simplest case, if a company lends money to a person to enable them to buy shares in the company and the loan is well secured and has a good rate of interest, then the company, and the creditors, can benefit. On the other hand, financial assistance transactions can harm the interests of creditors and minority shareholders, particularly in the context of a takeover or change in control of a company. A situation which provokes the concern of regulators arises where person B borrows money from an independent source to fund a takeover of company X. Once in control of the company, B then repays the loan with funds borrowed from the company. The company has provided the funds for the purchase of its own shares. But even this scenario may not be objectionable in all cases. In its 1962 report on the reform of the companies’ legislation in the United Kingdom, the Jenkins Committee argued that it would be proper if B, having gained control of company X, caused the company to validly pay a dividend, which B then used to repay the original loan. ‘Such a payment [of the dividend] cannot prejudice the rights of creditors, while minority shareholders will directly benefit from it/122

## 8.55.10 The regulation of financial assistance transactions

Historically, financial assistance transactions were prohibited unless detailed procedural requirements for shareholder approval by special resolution were satisfied, and creditors were given the opportunity to challenge the procedure. The current provisions in pt 2J.3 are more permissive and are intended to minimise difficulties for ordinary commercial transactions122 In general terms, the financial assistance provisions in the Corporations Act follow a similar pattern to those governing reductions of share capital and buybacks concerning the preconditions, the shareholder approval requirements, the notice and lodgement requirements, and the consequences of contravention. Permitted financial assistance transactions

Section 260A sets out the circumstances in which a company can financially assist a person to acquire shares or units of shares in that company or its holding company. The basic requirement is that financial assistance can only be given if it does not materially prejudice the interests of the company or its shareholders, or the company’s ability to pay its creditors. If that is the case, the next requirement is that the assistance must be approved by a special or a unanimous resolution of shareholders, as described below. Alternatively, it may be that financial assistance is specifically exempted from s 260A; the exemptions are also described below. Before examining the requirements in more detail, some specific features of s 260A should be noted: (1) The section refers to acquiring shares or ‘units of shares’ in the company. The term ‘unit’ is defined in s 9. In relation to shares, a unit means a right or interest in a share, whether legal or equitable, and includes an option to acquire such a right or interest. Thus, the scope of these sections extends beyond simple, direct legal ownership of shares. For the sake of simplicity, the following discussion refers only to an acquisition of shares, but the reader should bear in mind this extended application. (2) An ‘acquisition of shares’ may occur by way of a fresh issue of shares, a transfer of shares, or by any other means (s 260A(3)). (3) The section applies whether the financial assistance is given before or after the acquisition of the shares. In Law Society of New South Wales v Milios, Austin J confirmed that s 260A applies if the financial assistance comes after the completion of the acquisition of shares, provided that there is a link between the assistance and the acquisition ‘which draws the transaction within the policy concerns which the section addresses’124 What is financial assistance?

The Corvorations Act does not define ‘financial assistance’ other than to suaaest it can take the form of the pavment of a dividend by a company (s 260A(2) Historically, financial assistance transactions were prohibited unless detailed procedural requirements for shareholder approval by special resolution were satisfied, and creditors were given the opportunity to challenge the procedure. The current provisions in pt 2J.3 are more permissive and are intended to minimise difficulties for ordinary commercial transactions.122 Permitted financial assistance transactions What is financial assistance?

The Corporations Act does not define ‘financial assistance, other than to suggest it can take the form of the payment of a dividend by a company (s 260A(2) (b)). The court will look at the commercial realities and consider the transaction as a whole before deciding whether it constitutes the giving of financial assistance as prohibited by s 260A.!5 Clearly, financial assistance could include a gift of shares by a company. It could also include a loan by the company in the same circumstances.!22 The term can encompass less direct forms of assistance, such as a guarantee given by a company. For example, the financial assistance provision could cover the situation where B wishes to purchase shares in company X from C. B borrows the money from D, with company X acting as guarantor of the loan. It also covers the payment of costs related to the purchase of shares, such as stamp duty, valuation or due diligence costs.28 Another instance of indirect financial assistance could be the provision of security.!22 In Heald v O’Connor,32 Mr Heald agreed to sell to Mr O'Connor all the shares in a particular company. To enable payment for the shares, Heald agreed to lend a sum of money to O'Connor which was to be secured by a charge over the company’s assets. The company subsequently granted that security. The Court held that, by giving the security, the company had given financial assistance to O'Connor as purchaser of the shares, since without the security Heald would not have been willing to make the loan. Other examples of indirect assistance are the release by a company of an obligation or the forgiving of a debt. (3) The section applies whether the financial assistance is given before or after the acquisition of the shares. In Law Society of New South Wales v Milios, Austin J confirmed that s 260A applies if the financial assistance comes after the completion of the acquisit ion of shares, provided that there is a link between the assistance and the acquisition ‘which draws the transaction within the policy concerns which the section addresses’124 What is financial assistance?

In the absence of specific legislative guidance, courts have had to determine what constitutes financial assistance on the particular facts of a case. The underlying principle in this process was set out by Hoffmann J in Charterhouse Investment Trust Ltd v Tempest Diesels Ltd, opining that: [T]he words [financial assistance] have no technical meaning and their frame of reference is ... the language of ordinary commerce. One must examine the commercial realities of the transaction and decide whether it can properly be described as the giving of financial assistance by the company./3 To assist in this determination, different approaches have emerged. These approaches have generally resolved in favour of the impoverishment’ test which asks whether the transaction involves the conversion of the company’s assets into something of lesser value; for example, where cash is converted into an unsecured loan without interest to the purchaser of the shares.122 In 2019, in Connective Services Pty Ltd v Slea Pty Ltd, the High Court rejected the application of such tests to determine whether financial assistance existed, holding instead that the term should be given a broad commercial meaning. The case involved a pre-emptive rights clause in the two appellant companies’ constitutions (‘the Connective companies’). These clauses provided that before a shareholder could transfer their shares in the company, they had to offer them to existing shareholders in proportion to the number of shares already held by that shareholder. Slea Pty Ltd held 33.3 per cent of the shares in the Connective companies, along with two other shareholders: Millsave Holdings Pty Ltd (‘Millsave’) and Haron. It was alleged that the sole director and shareholder of Slea Pty Ltd, Mr Tsialtas, had entered into an agreement to sell Slea’s shares in the Connective companies to Minerva Financial Group Pty Ltd. In response to this, the Connective companies commenced legal proceedings against Slea Pty Ltd, seeking to compel Slea Pty Ltd to offer its shares to the other shareholders under the pre-emptive clauses. Slea Pty Ltd countered these proceedings by seeking an injunction restraining the legal action on the basis that they constituted financial assistance by the Connective companies. The High Court considered that the three elements necessary to establish a contravention of s 260A(1) of the Corporations Act are:

+ financial assistance given by the company
* to acquire shares or units of shares in the company, and
+ which materially prejudices the interests of the company or its shareholders or its ability to pay its creditors.

The High Court held that financial assistance did not need to involve the diminution or depletion of assets; rather, ‘any action by the company can be financial assistance if it eases the financial burden that would be involved in the process of acquisition or if it improves the person’s “net balance of financial advan- tage” in relation to the acquisition’33 assistance by the company./3 tage” in relation to the acquisition’33 On the facts, the action by the Connective companies in commencing and funding the legal proceedings against Slea Pty Ltd was financial assistance, as it eased the financial burden on the other shareholders in relation to acquiring the shares. The pre-emptive rights proceedings would normally have been brought by Millsave and Haron in their own right234 An additional issue that arises with s 260A is whether the payment of a dividend amounts to financial assistance. While s 260A(2)(b) states expressly that financial assistance may take the form of paying a dividend, payment of a dividend may be quite proper, as was the case in Re Wellington Publishing Co Ltd135 Wellington acquired the entire share capital of another company that possessed large undistributed profits. It was then proposed that those reserves should be used to declare a dividend which would be applied by Wellington to pay for the shares it had acquired. In the New Zealand Supreme Court, Quilliam J held that no financial assistance had been given: ‘The expression ‘financial assistance’ is an indefinite one and it is beyond normal experience to regard that expression as applying to the payment of a dividend. The payment of a dividend is part of the normal functions of a company, and indeed, in the final analysis, is probably as much the reason for the company’s existence as is the earning of profits the reason for an individual trader being in business. To be more precise, a dividend must be regarded as first and foremost a return on investment. In the customary usage of words the payment by a company of a dividend to a shareholder is not to be regarded as giving financial assistance to that shareholder.3¢ The capital maintenance principle is not breached by the proper determination or declaration and payment of dividends where the company’s assets exceed its liabilities122 This same principle is at stake in ss 260A-C. Another issue with the notion of financial assistance is whether the transaction in question needs to assist the person to acquire shares. In Burton v Palmer, Mahoney JA held that ‘the mere agreement of the company to pay its present indebtedness’ does not amount to financial assistance.138 He considered that term ‘assistance’ in this context meant ‘the furnishing of something which is needed or, at the least which is wanted, in order that the transaction be carried out. ... [The term] has a meaning which is closer to need or want; it does not mean something which is merely co-operation’122 However, in Independent Another issue with the notion of financial assistance is whether the transaction in question needs to assist the person to acquire shares. In Burton v Palmer, Mahoney JA held that ‘the mere agreement of the company to pay its present indebtedness’ does not amount to financial assistance.138 He considered that term assistance’ in this context meant ‘the furnishing of something which is needed or, at the least which is wanted, in order that the transaction be carried out. ... [The term] has a meaning which is closer to need or want; it does not mean something which is merely co-operation’122 However, in Independent Steels Pty Ltd v Ryan, Fullagar J suggested that the words ‘need or want’ are not to be interpreted too narrowly.!° His Honour stated that financial assistance might occur even in the case where ‘the purchaser did not mind whether or not it was given the assistance’14! Finally, in order to establish that financial assistance is caught by s 260A, it is necessary to show that the assistance is linked to the acquisition of shares.142 Although the section does not require the company to have knowledge that the financial assistance is being used to aid the acquisition of shares, this issue can still arise in litigation. An example is found in the English case of Belmont Finance Corporation v Williams Furniture Ltd (No 2).'43 The facts were a complex version of a relatively simple situation: B, although lacking the necessary funds, wished to purchase shares in A Ltd as part of an agreed takeover. It was arranged that A Ltd would purchase certain assets from B. After the price had been paid for the assets, B then made the takeover by purchasing shares in A Ltd. The question for the Court was whether the purpose of the asset purchase was really to provide B with the funds necessary to acquire the shares in A Ltd. Buckley LJ identified three factors relevant to deciding what the purpose of the asset purchase was: whether the asset purchase was in the company’s commercial interests; whether the price paid for the assets by A Ltd was fair; and whether the sole or a part purpose of the purchase was to provide funds for the share acquisition. His Honour noted that the legislation would not be breached merely because an asset purchase was followed by an acquisition of shares. In Australia, under s 260A, these issues would be assessed in determining whether the asset purchase overcomes the criterion of material prejudice. Material prejudice

The preceding comment reminds us that characterising a transaction as financial assistance is only half the task. Section 260A(1)(a) also requires that the financial assistance does not involve material prejudice to the interests of shareholders, the company, or the company’s capacity to pay its creditors. What constitutes material prejudice is a question of fact to be answered in each case. The onus is on the company to show that the financial assistance does not materially prejudice the company, its shareholders, and its creditors.144 An example of a transaction where material prejudice was established is Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Adler.14* In that case, Mr Adler was a director of HIH, a listed insurance company. Adler caused HIHC, a subsidiary of HIH, to make an unsecured loan of $10 million to a company, PEE, which he controlled as trustee under a trust (‘AEUT’) for HIH. The loan was made with the knowledge of only Mr Williams and Mr Fodera, the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of HIH respectively, and was in breach of the company’s investment guidelines. Part of the loan funds were used to purchase HIH shares with the purpose of signalling Adler's confidence in the company and stabilising its falling share price. Santow J held as follows: Material prejudice Santow J held as follows:

HIHC suffered material prejudice as a result of its financial assistance, so contravening s 260A of the Corporations Act. It did so by exchanging cash for either unsecured indebtedness owed to it, or alternatively in the first instance equitable rights by way of resulting or other trust in respect of the HIH shares. ... Such rights against PEE were from the start of materially lesser value than the cash handed over. This is because such equitable rights would be likely to be contentious and to require expensive litigation to enforce in Court. Thereafter material prejudice also resulted from the other elements of the transaction, that is, the lack of safeguards in, and disadvantageous terms of, the AEUT trust documentation and the circumstances which, from its inception, rendered the investment in HIH shares inherently likely to give rise to the loss that in fact occurred. These included Mr Adler’s intention, not to make a quick profit, but to support the HIH. share price. A loss was inherently likely from the inception, and did in fact eventuate .. 146 This analysis looks at the whole of the transaction and the commercial realities to see whether it materially prejudices the interests of the company, shareholders or creditors. It follows the approach adopted by Hoffmann J in Charterhouse Investment Trust Ltd v Tempest Diesels Ltd that it is: necessary to look at all interlocking elements in a commercial transaction as a whole, and to determine where the net balance of financial advantage lay42 However, there are some uncertainties about the interpretation of s 260A. As Young J has observed, there are ‘considerable problems in the s 260A(1) definition of what are the interests of the company or its shareholders which are not to be materially prejudiced’/48 While the example given in the Explanatory Memorandum (where a company lends money to another company that is bordering on insolvency) is relatively clear, other situations are harder to determine. The following questions, among others, are not answered by the section:

* The section treats the interests of the company and its shareholders as being aligned. What happens where this is not the case? The section does not refer
to the interests of the shareholders ‘as a whole’ an expression used elsewhere in the Corporations Act (for example, s 232). Does this mean that material prejudice to any member will suffice? necessary to look at all interlocking elements in a commercial transaction as a whole, and to determine where the net balance of financial advantage lay.42 The section does not indicate the timeframe within which the prejudice is to be assessed; for example, will the risk of material prejudice to shareholders’ interests in the short term satisfy the test, even where there are good prospects for long-term improvements in their position? It is not clear, despite the examples given in the Explanatory Memorandum, that prejudice is to be determined solely in financial terms. Financial assistance transactions may be used to alter the balance of control in a company, thereby prejudicing the corporate governance interests of existing shareholders. Some of these questions were answered by the High Court in Connective Services (discussed above). It noted the purpose of the section is to be protective, particularly to minority shareholders, and that the reference to the interests of shareholders ‘must mean both the shareholders collectively and each shareholder individually’142 One consequence of the indeterminate nature of material prejudice is that it might lead directors to use the shareholder approval mechanism out of a sense of caution. This is underlined by the fact that, where an application for an injunction or damages is sought under s 1324 in relation to a contravention of s 260A(1)(a), the court must assume that the conduct constitutes a contravention unless the company or person proves otherwise (s 1324(1B)). If the financial assistance does entail material prejudice, then it will require shareholder approval. The approval can be given in one of two ways: either by a special resolution with no votes being cast in favour by the person (or their associates) who is acquiring the shares; or by a resolution agreed to by all ordinary shareholders (that is, unanimous approval) (s 260B(1)). If a special resolution is passed, a copy must be lodged with ASIC within 14 days. For an example of the disclosures that are required to be given to shareholders under s 260B, see Milburn v Pivot Ltd.1=° In that case, the documentation sent to shareholders who approved the transaction under s 260B was’evasive, inadequate and incomplete.1=! Exempted transactions

Anumber of transactions are exempted from the operation of s 260A and are listed in s 260C. They cover situations that are commercially unobjectionable and do not give rise to the concerns about financial assistance identified above. Section 260C specifies that to be exempted the assistance must be given in the ordinary course of commercial dealing. The exclusions in s 260C are as follows: (1) Acquisition or creation by a company of a lien on its partly paid shares for an amount payable to the company on those shares (sub-s (1)(a)): it is common for a constitution to give it a right of lien over partly paid shares for any outstanding calls on those shares and for other moneys owing to the company. The effect is to make the member's shares a security for the amounts owed. (2) Agreement between a company and subscriber for payment of shares by instalments (sub-s (1)(b)): this exempts such an agreement provided, once again, that it is made in the ardinary course af cammercial dealina who approved the transaction under s 260B was’evasive, inadequate and incomplete.!5! Exempted transactions

(2) Agreement between a company and subscriber for payment of shares by instalments (sub-s (1)(b)): this exempts such an agreement provided, once again, that it is made in the ordinary course of commercial dealing. (3) Provision of finance as company’s ordinary business (sub-s (2)): this exclusion is aimed at companies, such as banks and finance companies, whose business includes ‘providing finance’ This is defined in s 9 as lending money, giving guarantees, providing security for loans made by someone else, or drawing, accepting, indorsing, negotiating or discounting bills of exchange, cheques, payment orders or promissory notes so that someone else can obtain funds. The financial assistance must be given in the ordinary course of that business and be on ordinary commercial terms. A loan made by a finance company for the direct purpose of financing the purchase of its shares would most likely fall outside this exclusion.1®2 In Ex parte D, Pidgeon J indicated that the type of transaction that would fall within this exemption would be the case of a customer who is given a loan by a bank to enable him to increase his share portfolio when the bank knows that the customer may well acquire shares in the bank: ‘the advance would be on a small scale and the purpose of acquiring shares is a similar purpose to which the bank normally lends money’!53 His Honour also not- ed that the onus is on the defendant to establish that the exemption applies. (4) Guarantee or security provided by a subsidiary company of a borrower (sub-s (3): this exclusion will apply where a company is under a liability to repay money it has received in response to a public invitation or offer for debentures. It is common practice for the liability of the borrowing company to be guaranteed by one of its subsidiary companies, or for the subsidiary to guarantee the repayment of the debt. This excludes the guarantee or security from the financial assistance rules, provided that the guarantee or security is given in the ordinary course of commercial dealing. (5) Financial assistance given under an employee share scheme (sub-s (4)): this requires that financial assistance be approved by ordinary resolution at a general meeting of the company. If the company is a subsidiary of another domestic company, then the parent company must also pass a resolution. An employee share scheme is defined in s 9 (see the discussion of employee share scheme buy-backs above at Section 8.50.10). (6) Reductions of share capital and buy-backs (sub-s (5)(a)): this excludes reductions of share capital carried out under pt 2J.1 div 1 from the financial assistance rules. In Re Bidvest Australia Ltd, Young J expressed his inclination towards the view that this exemption applies only to a discrete reduction of capital, and not to a reduction that is caught up in a scheme of arrangement. Similarly, sub-s (5)(b) excludes share buy-backs carried out in accordance with pt 2J.1 div 2. (7) Purchase by a company of its shares pursuant to a court order (sub-s (5)(c)): this exclusion is a necessary adjunct to other provisions; for example, ss 232-5, giving the court power to make orders in cases of oppression or unfair discrimination or prejudice against a member. (8) Discharge of an ordinary company liability (sub-s (5)(d)): this excludes cases where a company discharges an existing liability on ordinary commercial terms that was incurred as a result of a transaction entered on ordinary commercial terms. (4) Guarantee or security provided by a subsidiary company of a borrower (sub-s (3): this exclusion will apply where a company is under a liability to repay money it has received in response to a public invitation or offer for debentures. It is common practice for the liability of the borrowing company to be guaranteed by one of its subsidiary companies, or for the subsidiary to guarantee the repayment of the debt. This excludes the guarantee or security from the financial assistance rules, provided that the guarantee or security is given in the ordinary course of commercial dealing. Consequences for contravening s 260A

The consequences for contravening s 260A follow the same pattern as for contraventions of the reduction of capital and the buy-back provisions. Thi: cludes the application of directors’ duties in s 260E. A company can contravene s 260A by giving financial assistance that materially prejudices the interests of shareholders or its ability to pay its creditors, or by failing to obtain the approval of shareholders. Pursuant to s 260D, where there is a contravention, the financial assistance transaction, and any transaction or contract that is connected with it, is still valid and the company is not guilty of an offence. However, any person who is involved in the contravention (as defined in s 79) is liable under the civil penalty provisions in pt 9.4B (s 260A(2)). While the requirements set out in s 260A are not crucial to the validity of the transaction, they are relevant in determining liability of persons for contraventions of the financial assistance provisions. In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Adler, Williams and Adler were found to be involved in the contravention of s 260A. Santow J applied the test of the High Court in Yorke v Lucas,155 finding that Williams and Adler (but not Fodera) had intentionally participated in the contravention because they each had the necessary knowledge of the essential facts.15° A contravention (or threatened contravention) of s 260A may be used to support an application for an injunction or damages under s 1324. The defendant will bear the onus of establishing that there has not been a contravention. Directors may be liable under s 588G if the debt which is incurred by the financial assistance agreement is entered into when the company is insolvent or causes the company to become insolvent52 Consequences for contravening s 260A

Acompany can contravene s 260A by giving financial assistance that materially prejudices the interests of shareholders or its ability to pay its creditors, or by failing to obtain the approval of shareholders. Pursuant to s 260D, where there is a contravention, the financial assistance transaction, and any transaction or contract that is connected with it, is still valid and the company is not guilty of an offence. However, any person who is involved in the contravention (as defined in s 79) is liable under the civil penalty provisions in pt 9.4B (s 260A(2)). While the requirements set out in s 260A are not crucial to the validity of the transaction, they are relevant in determining liability of persons for contraventions of the financial assistance provisions. In Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Adler, Williams and Adler were found to be involved in the contravention of s 260A. Santow J applied the test of the High Court in Yorke v Lucas,155 finding that Williams and Adler (but not Fodera) had intentionally participated in the contravention because they each had the necessary knowledge of the essential facts.5° Directors may be liable under s 588G if the debt which is incurred by the financial assistance agreement is entered into when the company is insolvent or causes the company to become insolvent152 This chapter examined the law relating to corporate finance. We explored the nature of shares and the types of shares issued by companies. We considered the nature of debt finance used by companies and the types of instruments and obligations it creates. We discussed share capital transactions including dividends, reduction of capital, share buy-backs and financial assistance transactions. O Loading. Please wait C) Loading. Please wait
