| About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2026 LexisNexis

Matthew Duff

User Name: Matthew Duff

Date and Time: Sunday, 1 March 2026 11:50 am AEST

Job Number: 277085532

Document (1)

1. International developments in IP laws and AI

Client/Matter: -None-

Matthew Duff

International developments in IP laws and AI

Maintained

Jump to section

United States   |   United Kingdom   |   European Union   |   China   |   New Zealand   |   Global AI Principles

Authored and updated by Professor John V Swinson, The University of Queensland.

United States

There have been many lawsuits commenced in the United States regarding Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Intellectual Property (IP), and the US Copyright Office and US Patent and Trademark Office are proactive in this 
space.

Many of the AI lawsuits in the United States are still at an early stage, and some court rulings have been in 
response to the defendants’ motions to dismiss. In general, some causes of action have been dismissed, and some 
have been allowed to proceed. For example, a cause of action that has not been successful is that AI models are 
infringing derivative works of the training materials. Similarly, claims that all AI outputs should be automatically 
considered infringing derivative works have been dismissed by courts, because evidence is needed to show that 
the output is substantially similar to an ingested work.

As of early 2026, courts are moving past procedural motions toward dispositive rulings, for example on fair use.

Generally, to obtain copyright protection, there must be a human author, although a human and a computer working 
together may be sufficient to establish copyright. The question currently being debated is how much and what type 
of human effort is necessary to establish copyright protection.

The United States Copyright Office has a detailed Copyright and Artificial Intelligence 
 resource page.

Copyright protection of AI output — a short history

In 2018, Dr Stephen Thaler applied for copyright registration in a work of visual art produced by a generative AI 
system he created, called the Creativity Machine. Dr Thaler sought to register his work as a computer-generated 
“work-made-for-hire” on the basis that he created the AI machine which “autonomously” produced the work. The US 
Copyright Office denied Dr Thaler’s application for copyright registration since it was not the product of human 
creativity. In August 2023, a US District Court upheld the Copyright Office’s decision, explaining that under the plain 
language of the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth), “an original work of authorship” required that the author be a human 
“based on centuries of settled understanding” and a dictionary definition of “author”. The court also cited the US 
Constitution’s IP clause which refers to “authors and inventors”, and over a century of Supreme Court precedent to 
support this principle. See Thaler v Perlmutter. Dr Thaler was unsuccessful in his appeal, when the United States 
Court of Appeal decided on 18 March 2025 that a non-human machine cannot be an author under the Copyright 
Act. See: Thaler v. Perlmutter, 130 F.4th 1039 (D.C. Cir. 2025) 
. The court detailed numerous sections of the 
Copyright Act that would make no sense if an author were a machine.  As “machines do not have property, 
traditional human lifespans, family members, domiciles, nationalities, mentes reae, or signatures”, the current 
copyright laws are not intended to apply to machines as authors — “humanity is a necessary condition for 
authorship under the Copyright Act”. On 2 May 2025, Thaler filed a Petition for a Rehearing En Banc 
 which was 
unsuccessful. On 9 October 2025, Thaler petitioned 
 the U.S. Supreme Court to hear this case. The Supreme 
Court petition argues that the Copyright Office’s interpretation of the Copyright Act has broad implications for other 
technologies and, if “consistently enforced, it would spell the end of copyright protection for many photographs and 
other works created with technological assistance.”
References: Thaler v. Perlmutter, 687 F. Supp. 3d 140 (D.D.C. 2023), affirmed, 130 F.4th 1039 (D.C. Cir. 2025)

The United States Copyright Office 
 reviewed a registration for a work entitled Zarya of the Dawn (Registration # 
VAu001480196) 
 containing human-authored elements combined with AI-generated images. In February 2023, 
the office concluded that a graphic novel comprised of human-authored text combined with images generated by

Page 2 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

the AI service, Midjourney, constituted a copyrightable work, but that the individual images themselves could not be 
protected by copyright.

The United States Copyright Office issued guidance in March 2023 
 regarding copyright protection and copyright 
registration in works containing AI-generated materials. The requirements include the provision of a brief statement 
in the “Author Created” field that describes the authorship contributed by a human. According to this guidance, it is 
permissible in a copyright registration to refer to AI as being involved in the creation.

On 5 April 2024, the United States Copyright Office took a reconsideration action and registered a copyright for 
Elisa Rae Shupe, who writes under the pseudonym Ellen Rae, for her book titled AI Machinations: Tangled Webs 
and Typed Words. Shupe had used OpenAI's ChatGPT extensively while writing the book. The registration is 
limited, in effect, a compilation right. According to an article about the case in Wired: “The USCO’s notice granting 
Shupe copyright registration of her book does not recognise her as author of the whole text as is conventional for 
written works”. Instead, she is considered the author of the “selection, coordination, and arrangement of text 
generated by artificial intelligence”.

This means no one can copy the book without permission, but the actual sentences and paragraphs themselves are 
not copyrighted and could theoretically be rearranged and republished as a different book. For more information 
see Shupe’s AI machinations publishing website at Copyrighting Books That Contain AI-Generated Material 
 and 
Wired, How One Author Pushed the Limits of AI Copyright 
, (17 April 2024).

The United States Copyright Office  undertook public consultation in relation to the above guidance note and other 
issues. To inform the office’s study and help assess whether legislative or regulatory steps in this area are 
warranted, the office sought comment on the use of copyrighted works to train AI models, the appropriate levels of 
transparency and disclosure with respect to the use of copyrighted works, and the legal status of AI-generated 
outputs. After hosting public listening sessions and webinars, the Copyright Office published a notice of inquiry in 
the Federal Register in August 2023, which received over 10,000 comments by December 2023. See Latest Legal 
Updates: US Copyright Office seeks views on AI and Copyright by 30 October 2023 and US Copyright Office 
extends feedback deadline for AI and copyright inquiry. Further progress can be tracked via the Artificial Intelligence 
Study 
 page of the United States Copyright Office.

Copyright protection of AI output — current position

The United States Copyright Office released a three-part report on Copyright and Artificial Intelligence. Part 1 
 
was published on 31 July 2024 and addresses the topic of digital replicas. Part 2 
 was published on 29 January 
2025 and addresses the copyrightability of outputs created using generative AI. On 9 May 2025, the Copyright 
Office released a pre-publication version of Pt 3 
 dealing with generative AI training which is discussed in the next 
section below.

Part 2 of the Report addresses the copyrightability of outputs generated by AI systems. It analyses the type and 
level of human contribution sufficient to bring these outputs within the scope of copyright protection in the United 
States. The consensus from the public consultation was that the vast majority of commenters agreed that existing 
law is adequate in this area and that material generated wholly by AI is not copyrightable.

Commenters differed, however, as to protection for generative AI outputs that involve some form of human 
contribution. They expressed divergent views on what types and amounts of contribution could constitute 
authorship under existing law. Many also stressed the desirability of greater clarity in this area, including with 
respect to the use of AI as a tool in the creative process.

As a result, the Copyright Office set out legal principles that govern the analysis of the type and level of human 
contribution required and assesses their application to AI-generated content. The Copyright Office, in Pt 2 of their 
report, concluded the following:

•
Questions of copyrightability and AI can be resolved pursuant to existing law, without the need for 
legislative change.

•
The use of AI tools to assist rather than stand in for human creativity does not affect the availability of 
copyright protection for the output.

Page 3 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

•
Copyright protects the original expression in a work created by a human author, even if the work also 
includes AI-generated material.

•
Copyright does not extend to purely AI-generated material, or material where there is insufficient human 
control over the expressive elements.

•
Whether human contributions to AI-generated outputs are sufficient to constitute authorship must be 
analysed on a case-by-case basis.

•
Based on the functioning of current generally available technology, prompts do not alone provide sufficient 
control.

•
Human authors are entitled to copyright in their works of authorship that are perceptible in AI-generated 
outputs, as well as the creative selection, coordination, or arrangement of material in the outputs, or 
creative modifications of the outputs.

•
The case has not been made for additional copyright or sui generis protection for AI-generated content.

The Copyright Office has applied these principles in determining whether to issue a copyright registration to an AI-
generated work. Reportedly 
, the first work to be granted a copyright registration under these principles was an 
artistic work titled A Single Piece of American Cheese, because the Copyright Office found that the work contained 
a sufficient amount of human original authorship in the selection, arrangement, and coordination of the AI-
generated material that may be regarded as copyrightable.

Copyright infringement when training AI

There are many pending lawsuits against AI companies by the owners of copyright in works used to train AI 
systems. There are some example cases below.

A group of visual artists filed a copyright lawsuit against Stability AI, Midjourney and other companies for allegedly 
misusing their work to train generative AI systems. See Sarah Andersen v Stability AI Ltd, in the Northern District of 
California. It is claimed over five billion images were scraped (and therefore copied) from the internet for training 
Stability AI. One of the defendants relies on the First Amendment as a defence. On 30 October 2023, the court 
dismissed many of the plaintiffs’ claims (but not a claim for direct copyright infringement brought by Andersen 
against Stability). The plaintiffs filed a 96-page amended Statement of Claim 
 on 29 November 2023. On 12 
August 2024 
, the court dismissed the defendants’ motions to dismiss the Copyright Act claims against them and 
thus allowed these claims to proceed. Midjourney’s motion to dismiss the Lanham Act (false association) claims 
was also denied. The court made it clear that generative AI models are unlike any past technologies, and so relying 
on cases involving older technology such as video tapes was unlikely to be helpful. Each AI case may be different 
and will depend on the model and the types of works ingested. The judge stated:“... this is a case where plaintiffs 
allege that Stable Diffusion is built to a significant extent on copyrighted works and that the way the product 
operates necessarily invokes copies or protected elements of those works. The plausible inferences at this juncture 
are that Stable Diffusion by operation by end users creates copyright infringement and was created to facilitate that 
infringement by design”. This case is ongoing, with close of fact discovery scheduled to be complete by March 2026 
and trial reported to begin in September 2026. Discovery in this action is complex. For example, Stability AI 
produced approximately 100 terabytes of training data via Amazon Web Services S3 access, containing over 
260,000 objects with no manifest or organizational schema. During a meet and confer on 2 December 2025, 
Stability AI confirmed this reflects how it maintains the data in the ordinary course, yet declined to provide the 
roadmap it uses to navigate that data or any documentation explaining how the files relate to specific models, 
datasets, or training processes.
References: Sarah Andersen v Stability AI Ltd, Case No. 23-cv-00201-WHO 
Andersen v. Stability AI Ltd 744 F.Supp.3d 956 (2024)

John Grisham, George RR Martin and a group of other authors have sued OpenAI in a class action in the Southern 
District of New York on 19 September 2023 for copyright infringement: Authors Guild v OpenAI Inc. The Class 
Action Complaint states: “Defendants copied Plaintiffs’ works wholesale, without permission or consideration”. 
Defendants then fed Plaintiffs’ copyrighted works into their “large language models” or “LLMs”, algorithms designed 
to output human-seeming text responses to users’ prompts and queries. These algorithms are at the heart of 
Defendants’ massive commercial enterprise. “And at the heart of these algorithms is systematic theft on a mass 
scale”. This case is ongoing.
References: Authors Guild v OpenAI Inc (No. 1:23-cv-8292)

Page 4 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

In August 2023, a story 
 in The Atlantic publication disclosed that Books3 (a database on 190,000 books) was 
used to train Meta’s LLaMA, a version of Bloomberg’s AI and several other generative AI programs. This has 
resulted in a class action lawsuit being filed in the Southern District of New York on 17 October 2023 by a group of 
authors against Meta, Bloomberg, Microsoft and others: Huckabee v Meta Platforms, Inc.
References: Huckabee v Meta Platforms, Inc

Julian Sancton is lead plaintiff in a class action filed 21 November 2023 against Microsoft and OpenAI regarding 
training of AI using their works: Sancton v OpenAI Inc.
References: Sancton v OpenAI Inc, 1:23-cv-10211, (SDNY, 21 November 2023) ECF No 1

The New York Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft in the Southern District of New York on 27 December 2023 for 
copyright infringement claiming that millions of news articles from The New York Times were used to train chatbots 
that now compete with The New York Times. OpenAI has challenged the evidence of NY Times on the basis of 
“prompt hacking” — that is, using prompts that are not typical but are designed to bolster the plaintiff’s copyright 
claims. There are many ongoing discovery disputes in this case, with the court file including over 350 items 
, 
many with exhibits, filed in the first year of the case. For example, the NY Times is trying to obtain on discovery of 
the documents used to train ChatGPT and to understand what works were ingested into the ChatGPT training 
system. See the Court Listener website: The New York Times Company v. Microsoft Corporation (1:23-cv-11195)

.

The Court considered several of OpenAI’s and Microsoft’s motions to dismiss in a judgment in April 2025, allowing 
the case to proceed 
.

This case has now been consolidated with other cases against OpenAI. See In re: OpenAI Copyright Infringement 
Litigation, discussed below. Also see  The Times v OpenAI and Microsoft.
References: The Times v OpenAI and Microsoft, 1:23-cv-11195, now consolidated as: In Re: OpenAI, Inc., 
Copyright Infringement Litigation 25-md-3143 (SHS) (OTW)

OpenAI has published its views 
 on this lawsuit, stating “Training AI models using publicly available internet 
materials is fair use, as supported by long-standing and widely accepted precedents.” See also Open AI’s in the 
article in The New York Times, Reporting the facts about the New York Times’ lawsuit 
.

On 30 April 2024, eight US newspapers (New York Daily News, Chicago Tribune, Orlando Sentinel, Sun-Sentinel, 
Mercury News, Denver Post, Orange Country Register and Pioneer Press) filed a copyright lawsuit against 
Microsoft and Open AI in the Southern District of New York. The plaintiffs allege that the Defendant “purloin[ed] 
millions of the Publishers’ copyrighted articles without permission and without payment to fuel the commercialisation 
of their generative artificial intelligence products.” See Daily News LP v Microsoft Corporation, Microsoft and 
OpenAI call this a “copycat lawsuit” modelled on the NY Times lawsuit. In a Motion filed by Microsoft and Open AI 
on 11 June 2024 to dismiss ancillary claims, they say: “the core issue [of the case] of whether using copyrighted 
content to train a generative AI model is fair use under copyright law. That key question will require the 
development of record evidence to show, inter alia, that Plaintiffs have flagrantly mischaracterised what OpenAI’s 
products are and how they work. To take just one example of many, the suggestion that ChatGPT can be used to 
generate at will the verbatim text of newspaper articles is obviously and demonstrably false. Plaintiffs’ contrary 
suggestions depend on an elaborate effort to coax such outputs from OpenAI’s products, in a way that violates the 
operative OpenAI terms of service and that no normal user would ever even attempt, combined with a willfully 
misleading presentation of the results”. This case has now been consolidated with other cases against OpenAI. See 
In re: OpenAI Copyright Infringement Litigation, discussed below. 
References: Daily News LP v Microsoft Corporation, 1:24-cv-03285 (SDNY) now consolidated as: In Re: OpenAI, 
Inc., Copyright Infringement Litigation 25-md-3143 (SHS) (OTW)

In April 2025, the United States Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation consolidated twelve cases 
 originally 
brought in the Southern District of New York and Northern District of California against OpenAI and Microsoft. The 
MDL litigation is in S.D.N.Y. and is now known as In re: OpenAI Copyright Infringement Litigation.

On 27 October 2025, the Court denied OpenAI’s motion to dismiss based on the outputs of ChatGPT. The Court 
found that the plaintiffs have alleged in respect of some outputs of ChatGPT (such as summaries of novels), a 
reasonable jury could find are substantially similar to plaintiffs’ works. This is being called regurgitation.

Page 5 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

On 7 November 2025, the Court granted the plaintiff’s motion to compel production of the 20 million deidentified 
consumer ChatGPT output logs.

The plaintiffs’ case now appears to be focused on rebutting OpenAI’s fair use defense by showing that the large 
language models (LLMs) trained by ChatGPT do not just learn but can memorize and regurgitate training data. 
Discovery is focused on regurgitation to find instances where the ChatGPT outputs are near-verbatim copies of the 
plaintiffs’ works.

As a result of this decision, AI developers are trying to measure if and how much of their output is regurgitation, and 
is providing a bonus to licensing deals for AI training data. 
References: IN RE: OPENAI, INC., COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT LITIGATION 25-md-3143 (SHS) (OTW)

There is also a consolidated class action against Google, alleging that Google willfully infringed millions of 
registered copyrighted works to create its commercial artificial intelligence business, including Google Gemini. This 
case is known as In Re Google Generative AI Copyright Litigation 
.

On September 11, 2025, Google was successful in having part of the Plaintiffs’ claims dismissed on what appears 
to be technical pleading grounds, eg, that the Plaintiffs improperly assert infringement of unspecified works.
References: IN RE GOOGLE GENERATIVE AI COPYRIGHT LITIGATION, Master File Case No. 23-cv-03440-
EKL

Anthropic has sued in class-action lawsuit in California 
 by three authors who assert that their books and 
hundreds of thousands of others have been used to train the AI-powered chatbot Claude. See lawsuit: Bartz v. 
Anthropic PBC (3:24-cv-05417) Northern District of California, filed 19 August 2024 
.

On June 23, 2025, Anthropic was partially successful in its claims of fair use for training. The court said, “The 
copies used to train specific LLMs were justified as a fair use. Every factor but the nature of the copyrighted work 
favors this result. The technology at issue was among the most transformative many of us will see in our lifetimes. 
… This order grants summary judgment for Anthropic that the training use was a fair use. And, it grants that the 
print-to-digital format change was a fair use for a different reason. But it denies summary judgment for Anthropic 
that the pirated library copies must be treated as training copies. We will have a trial on the pirated copies used to 
create Anthropic’s central library and the resulting damages, actual or statutory (including for willfulness). That 
Anthropic later a bought a copy of a book it earlier stole off the internet will not absolve it of liability for the theft but it 
may affect the extent of statutory damages.”

However, the court was critical of Anthropic using copyrighted books from pirate sites (like Library Genesis) to train 
its AI models. That part of the case remained on foot. The parties then settled, with Anthropic agreeing 
 to pay 
$1.5 billion for copyright infringement (or about $3,000 a book).

In June 2024, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) filed two copyright infringement cases based 
on the infringement of copyrighted sound recordings copied and exploited without permission by two music 
generation services, Suno and Udio. The case against Suno, Inc, developer of Suno AI, was filed in the United 
States District Court for the District of Massachusetts and the case against Uncharted Labs, Inc, developer of Udio 
AI, was filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. See the RIAA’s Press release, 
Record Companies Bring Landmark Cases for Responsible AI Against Suno and Udio in Boston and New York 
Federal Courts, Respectively 
, which links to the two statements of claim.

Penske Media, the owner of titles such as The Hollywood Reporter, Variety, and Rolling Stone, is suing Google 
over the impact it says AI summaries in search are having on its traffic and revenue. The Penske lawsuit was filed 
on 12 September 2025 and claims that about 20% of search results in Google that contain a link to one of its sites 
feature an AI Overview and that this is impacting traffic to Penske’s websites. This case is a competition law case, 
not an IP case. Google has filed a motion to dismiss.
References: Penske Media Corporation v. Google LLC 1:25-cv-03192, (D.D.C.)

The Verge publication published a compilation of defences 
 raised by AI companies.

A 2023 ruling by the US Supreme Court in the case of Andy Warhol Foundation For The Visual Arts, Inc v 
Goldsmith et al, involved the US “fair use” doctrine and will likely impact AI cases. The case decided that Warhol’s

Page 6 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

use of a Lynn Goldsmith’s photograph of Prince as a basis for a work of art was not “fair use” by Warhol and was 
therefore a copyright infringement. The ruling is beneficial to people who own copyrighted content upon which other 
works are based and could have a negative impact for those wishing to train AI using the works of others.
References: Andy Warhol Foundation For The Visual Arts, Inc v Goldsmith et al No 21-869

In Thomas Reuters v ROSS Intelligence, the District Court found that ROSS infringed the plaintiff’s copyright and 
that ROSS’ fair use defense failed. Informed by the Andy Warhol decision discussed above, the court decided that 
ROSS’ use in using the copyright works for training AI was not transformative because of the competitive nature of 
their use. However, the District Court has granted ROSS’ motion for interlocutory appeal and stay, pending appeal, 
with Judge Bibas stating 
, “Though I remain confident in my February 2025 summary judgment opinion, I 
recognize that there are substantial grounds for difference of opinion on controlling legal issues in this case.”

In April 2024, a member of the US House of Representatives introduced the Generative AI Copyright Disclosure Act 
(H.R. 7913) 
. That Act, if passed, would require a person who creates or materially alters a training dataset for a 
generative AI system to submit a notice with the US Copyright Office containing a URL for the dataset and “a 
sufficiently detailed summary of any copyrighted works used” to create or materially alter the dataset. The Act is 
potentially retrospective as it applies to existing generative AI systems. The notice would need to be filed with the 
Copyright Office no later than 30 days before the generative AI system for which the training dataset would be used 
would be made available to consumers, or for an already-available generative AI system, no later than 30 days after 
the effective date of the Act.

A US Senate Bipartisan Working Group has published a roadmap for AI policy for the US Senate. The roadmap is 
titled “Driving U.S. Innovation in Artificial Intelligence” (May 2024). The roadmap encourages committees looking at 
IP issues to: “Consider federal policy issues related to the data sets used by AI developers to train their models, 
including data sets that might contain sensitive personal data or are protected by copyright, and evaluate whether 
there is a need for transparency requirements”.

See Driving U.S. Innovation in Artificial Intelligence 
.

There have also been non-copyright claims made against OpenAI and Microsoft for illegally training AI, such as 
privacy violations, negligence, unjust enrichment and the like. See eg, PM v OpenAI LP, filed in the Northern District 
of California on 28 June 2023.
References: PM v OpenAI LP (Case 3:23-cv-03199)

In respect of deep fake AI technology, actress Scarlett Johansson is alleging that OpenAI copied her voice.

Additionally, voice actors are bringing a class action against Lovo Inc for misappropriating their voiceovers using AI: 
Lehrman v. Lovo Inc. This case appears to be focused on privacy and unfair competition laws rather than copyright 
law.

On 7 July 2025, the court dismissed part of the plaintiffs’ case, saying “for the most part, Plaintiffs have not stated 
cognizable claims under federal trademark and copyright law. However, that does not mean they are without a 
remedy. Rather, claims for misappropriation of a voice, like the ones here, may be properly asserted under Sections 
50 and 51 of the New York Civil Rights Law, which, unlike copyright and trademark law, are tailored to balance the 
unique interests at stake.”

In dismissing the Plaintiffs’ infringement claim based on the use of their voices to train Lovo’s model, the court 
indicated that its dismissal was based on the plaintiffs’ failure to provide the appropriate factual allegations about 
how the training occurred and granted them leave to amend. The court also dismissed plaintiffs’ infringement claims 
based on the AI-generated outputs that “cloned” their voices. The Copyright Act does not protect the abstract 
qualities of a voice or new recordings that merely imitate or simulate the original.
References: Lehrman v. Lovo Inc., S.D.N.Y., No. 1:24-cv-03770

On 21 March 2024, Tennessee enacted a new law, the Ensuring Likeness, Voice, and Image Security Act of 2024 
(2023 Tenn. HB 2091 
) commonly known as the ELVIS Act. This law aims to ban unauthorised artificial 
intelligence reproductions of individuals’ likenesses and voices. The new Tennessee law follows the current trend of 
US lawmakers and regulators seeking to address deep fakes. The ELVIS Act deals with AI-generated songs by 
imposing civil and criminal liability for reproduction of any voice that is readily identifiable and attributable to a

Page 7 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

particular individual, “regardless of whether the sound contains the actual voice or a simulation of the voice of the 
individual”.

President Trump 
 issued an Executive Order that “directed the development of an AI Action Plan to sustain and 
enhance America’s global AI dominance.” President Trump asked American people to share their policy ideas for 
the AI Action Plan by responding to a Request for Information by 15 March 2025. In response, Google submitted 
 
that “Balanced copyright rules, such as fair use and text-and-data mining exceptions, have been critical to enabling 
AI systems to learn from prior knowledge and publicly available data, unlocking scientific and social advances. 
These exceptions allow for the use of copyrighted, publicly available material for AI training without significantly 
impacting rightsholders and avoid often highly unpredictable, imbalanced, and lengthy negotiations with data 
holders during model development or scientific experimentation.” OpenAI’s response 
 appears more balanced, 
but clear that China is a serious competitor: “America’s robust, balanced intellectual property system has long been 
key to our global leadership on innovation. We propose a copyright strategy that would extend the system’s role into 
the Intelligence Age by protecting the rights and interests of content creators while also protecting America’s AI 
leadership and national security. The federal government can both secure Americans’ freedom to learn from AI, and 
avoid forfeiting our AI lead to the PRC by preserving American AI models’ ability to learn from copyrighted material.”

Part 3 of the United States Copyright Report on Copyright and Artificial Intelligence, titled “Generative AI Training” 
was issued as a pre-publication edition in May 2025. The report 
 asked “Do any of the acts involved [in 
developing and training AI] require the copyright owners’ consent or compensation? And to the extent they do, how 
can that feasibly be accomplished?” The Report was somewhat tentative, noting that The White House also is 
considering similar issues as discussed above. It concludes: “In applying current law, we conclude that several 
stages in the development of generative AI involve using copyrighted works in ways that implicate the owners’ 
exclusive rights. The key question, as most commenters agreed, is whether those acts of prima facie infringement 
can be excused as fair use.”

Patent

Patent law in the US is similar to that in Australia in relation to the protection of AI inventions. Only humans can be 
inventors.

Thaler, who lost a similar case (see Thaler v Commissioner of Patents) in Australia, was also unsuccessful in a 
corresponding case in the United States. The Court of Appeal for the Federal Circuit emphasised a list of Patent Act 
examples that lend themselves to a holding that only human beings can be considered inventors: Thaler v Vidal.
References: Thaler v Commissioner of Patents [2022] HCATrans 199
Thaler v Vidal (2022) 169 IPR 360

The US Supreme Court turned away Thaler’s appeal on 23 April 2023.

The United States Patent and Trademark Office had an inquiry 
 in 2019 requesting comments on intellectual 
property and AI innovation and a public report 
 was issued on 6 October 2020.

The United States Patent and Trademark Office has a detailed guidance page 
 on AI and patent issues.

United Kingdom

The UK is debating the AI and IP law, with many proposals, some conflicting.

Copyright

The position in the UK is AI-generated works can be protected by copyright. This is different to the likely position in 
Australia. However, the law in this area is under review.

Section 178 
 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (UK) provides that a “computer generated” work is 
one that is generated by a computer in circumstances where there is no human author of the work. The “author” of 
a computer-generated work is the person who made the necessary arrangements to create the work. Such works 
will be protected for 50 years from the end of the calendar year in which they were created. The UK approach 
separates authorship and creativity.

Page 8 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

Generally, the UK government has an ongoing programme of work to develop a code of practice on copyright and 
AI. See The government’s code of practice on copyright and AI 
. The code of practice aims to make licences for 
data mining more available.

On 17 January 2023, Getty Images announced 
 that it had commenced legal proceedings against Stability AI in 
the High Court in London, alleging infringement of its IP rights. Stability AI’s “Stable Diffusion” system automatically 
generates images. This case is ongoing, with hearings not anticipated until mid-2025, and a judgment of the High 
Court unlikely until into 2026, with the possibility of appeals to follow. There is a growing pressure on the new 
government to take action now rather than wait for the court decisions.

The after procedural motions, the case had two claims:

a)
Stability AI infringed Getty's copyright by importing into the UK, an "infringing article” being the Stable Diffusion product.

b)
In some cases, the content produced by Stable Diffusion contained Getty’s watermark.  This resulted in a trademark 
infringement claim.

On 4 November 2025, the court delivered a long and important judgment in this case. Getty Images v Stability AI 
[2025] EWHC 2863 (Ch) 
.  In summary, the court decided:

•
Getty was unsuccessful in its importation claim, because Stable Diffusion (ie, the underlying model) was 
not an “infringing copy” of the works used to train it.  This was on that basis that, after training, the model 
no longer contains or stores the relevant training data.

•
Getty was successful in its trademark claim, with the court noting that Stability AI had distributed the model 
commercially.

The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 
 (UK) only allows text and data mining (TDM) to train and develop 
AI systems (and for other purposes) for non-commercial research use.

The Intellectual Property Office announced on 28 June 2022, “we plan to introduce a new copyright and database 
exception which allows TDM for any purpose”. See Artificial Intelligence and Intellectual Property: copyright and 
patents: Government response to consultation 
.

This proposal been criticised by the Culture, Media and Sport Committee of the House of Commons, which reported 
that “We recommend that the Government does not pursue plans for a broad text and data mining exemption to 
copyright. Instead, the Government should proactively support small AI developers in particular, who may find 
difficulties in acquiring licences, by reviewing how licensing schemes can be introduced for technical material and 
how mutually-beneficial arrangements can be struck with rights management organisations and creative industries 
trade bodies. The government should support the continuance of a strong copyright regime in the UK and be clear 
that licences are required to use copyrighted content in AI”. See House of Commons Committee Report, Connected 
tech: AI and creative technology 
, 30 August 2023.

The UK government undertook a consultation to explore ways to protect the rights of artists, writers, and composers 
when creative content is used to train AI models. A stated goal is to give creators control over their copyrighted 
material while fostering technological innovation. The consultation report 
 stated “At present, the application of 
UK copyright law to the training of AI models is disputed. Rights holders are finding it difficult to control the use of 
their works in training AI models and seek to be remunerated for its use. AI developers are similarly finding it 
difficult to navigate copyright law in the UK, and this legal uncertainty is undermining investment in and adoption of 
AI technology.  This status quo cannot continue.”  The Copyright and AI Consultation ran from 17 December 2024 
to 25 February 2025. Public feedback is currently being analysed 
.

In response to this consultation, OpenAI stated: 
 “A broad TDM [text and data mining] exception is necessary to 
drive AI innovation and investment in the UK, and can be made to balance the needs of AI development with the 
mitigation of concrete harms to copyright owners. Innovation and investments in AI infrastructure are only possible 
in jurisdictions where laws clearly support technological research and development. The UK must create a clear, 
predictable regulatory environment that sets it apart from other jurisdictions in order to boost its competitiveness. 
Such laws are not zero-sum: the Government can implement a broad TDM exception (Option Two) in a way that 
encourages innovation, addresses specific rightsholder concerns, and recognizes that AI will create new

Page 9 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

opportunities for creators’ and rightsholders’ creative output.” Google declined 
 to appear in public for a UK 
parliament session on copyright and AI, but in written submissions 
 stated that publishers should have the right to 
opt out of having their works used to train AI: “Without the appropriate balance between protection and access, 
copyright systems risk limiting the key societal and economic advances offered by AI, but may also undermine 
creativity over the longer-term. We believe that the most important factors for AI communities and web publishers 
are choice and control and we are working to improve machine readable approaches to achieve these goals.”

Patent

Thaler was unsuccessful before the Supreme Court regarding his appeal of a Court of Appeal decision that refused 
to accept the designations of DABUS, an AI machine, as the inventor on two patent applications. See case details 
provided 
 on the Supreme Court website. The Court of Appeal decision Thaler v Comptroller General of Patents, 
Designs and Trade Marks (21 September 2021) decided “Within the meaning of the 1977 Act the ‘inventor’ is the 
person who actually devised the invention. … Machines are not persons”. On 20 December 2023, the Supreme 
Court confirmed that an inventor under the 1977 Act must be a natural person: Thaler v Comptroller General of 
Patents, Designs and Trade Marks.
References: Thaler v Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks (2021) 164 IPR 129
Thaler v Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks [2023] UKSC 49

The Supreme Court (at para 52) potentially opened the door to the granting of a patent where a human and an AI 
machine work together: “… in this jurisdiction, it is not and has never been Dr Thaler’s case that he was the inventor 
and used DABUS as a highly sophisticated tool. Had he done so, the outcome of these proceedings might well 
have been different”.

In November 2023, the High Court of England and Wales decided that a hardware artificial neural network, once it 
has completed its learning process, qualifies as a computer rather than software. In the UK, a program for a 
computer is excluded from patent protection. Expert testimony emphasised the divergence between conventional 
computer programming and machine learning. The invention makes suggestions of similar music in terms of human 
perception and emotion irrespective of the genre of music by passing music tracks through a trained artificial neural 
network: Emotional Perception AI Ltd v Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks (21 November 
2023). This decision was overruled on 19 July 2024 by the Court of Appeal: Comptroller-General of Patents, 
Designs and Trade Marks v Emotional Perception AI Ltd. The Court of Appeal decided that an artificial neural 
network is a computer and that, whether it is implemented as hardware or software, the weights and biases of the 
artificial neural networks are a program for a computer and are therefore within the purview of the “program for a 
computer” exclusion from patent protection in s 1(2)(c) of the UK Patents Act 1977. The Court of Appeal stated that 
training a neural network was part of the creation of the program and therefore was not a technical contribution. In 
generative AI systems, training is a fundamental part of development of the AI system, and so this decision may 
impact the ability to patent certain AI developments in the UK. As a result, the UK IPO suspended its guidelines for 
examiners who are examining patent applications involving artificial neural networks. See Examining patent 
applications involving artificial neural networks 
.
References: Emotional Perception AI Ltd v Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks [2023] 
EWHC 2948 (Ch) 
Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks v Emotional Perception AI Ltd [2024] EWCA Civ 825

European Union

Patent

In the European Patent Office (EPO), Dr Thaler was unsuccessful in obtaining patent protection regarding the 
inventions he claims were made by DABUS, an AI machine. The EPO decided that the inventor named must be a 
natural person, see decision J 0008/20 (Designation of inventor/DABUS) 21-12-2021 
.

Inventors have rights (including the right to be named on patent applications) but machines have “at present no 
rights because they have no legal personality comparable to natural or legal persons”. The EPO distinguished 
machines from legal persons as there “is no legislation or jurisprudence establishing such a legal fiction”.

However, a human using an AI machine to generate an invention may be able to be listed on the invention created 
by the AI machine. On 21 December 2021, the Board of the EPO stated that “The Board is not aware of any case

Page 10 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

law which would prevent the user or the owner of a device involved in an inventive activity to designate himself as 
inventor under European patent law”. See J 8/20 (Designation of inventor/DABUS) at para. 4.6.6 
.

In Germany, one of Dr Thaler’s appeals contained three auxiliary requests:

•
to grant the patent without any inventor designation;

•
to include a paragraph in the description clarifying that DABUS created the invention; and

•
to designate the inventor as "Stephen L. Thaler, PhD who prompted the artificial intelligence DABUS to 
create the invention”.

The 11th Senate of the Federal Patent Court granted 
 the third auxiliary request, stating that while the role of AI 
in the creation of the invention may or may not be mentioned, in any case, a natural person must be named as the 
inventor. However, in related proceedings 
 relating to another Thaler patent application, the 18th Senate of the 
Federal Patent Court in Germany decided that a patent on AI-generated inventions cannot be granted unless the 
applicant omits the reference to the AI in the inventor designation. Both decisions are subject to appeal to the 
Federal Court of Justice.

Copyright protection

The Czech Municipal Court of Prague 
 decided a case 
 where a claimant who created and published an image 
using DALL-E, began an action for copyright infringement when the defendant used the same image on the 
defendant’s website. The court dismissed the case on procedural grounds but said in passing that AI could not be 
an author of copyright. The court left open the possibility that a sophisticated prompt could constitute a “unique 
creative contribution” which may be sufficient to allow the (human) user to obtain copyright in the AI output.

Copyright

In March 2024, Google was fined €250 million by a French regulator for breaching a settlement agreement with 
French media publishers regarding the reproduction of their content online. The French competition authority said 
Google’s AI chat service, Google Bard (now called Gemini), was trained on content from French publishers and 
news agencies without notifying them. The settlement agreement from 2022 required Google to conduct 
negotiations with publishers in good faith and to provide transparent information. The French regulator asserted that 
Google Bard was trained on data from French media publishers without Google informing the publishers or the 
regulator. Google Bard then displayed resulting content. (The settlement agreement was based on EU neighbouring 
rights provisions. EU has created a form of copyright called “neighbouring rights” that allows print media to require 
compensation for using their content.) See The Guardian 20 March 2024, “Google fined 250m euros in France for 
breaching intellectual property rules 
”.

On 27 September 2024, the Hamburg Regional Court (LG Hamburg) delivered a decision in Kneschke v. LAION 
, 
regarding copyright infringement and the use of copyright works to train AI. The plaintiff claimed that the defendant 
had infringed his copyright by using a photo in a dataset for training AI. The defendant is a non-profit organisation. 
The court ruled against the plaintiff, on the basis that the defendant’s activities were non-commercial scientific 
research and thus covered by a statutory defence. See also IPTech blog, “Breaking News from Germany! Hamburg 
District Court breaks new ground with judgment on the use of copyrighted material as AI training data 
”.

Collecting societies are starting to bring copyright lawsuits on behalf of authors against OpenAI for using copyright 
works to train AI. See Press release dated 13 November 2024 issued by the German music collecting society 
GEMA files model action to clarify AI providers‘ remuneration obligations in Europe 
.

In July 2025, the European Parliament published 
 a study Generative AI and Copyright — Training, Creation, 
Regulation 
. The study found:

•
The existing EU text-and-data mining (TDM) exception was not designed for the “expressive and synthetic 
nature of generative AI training,” and its application risks distorting the purpose of EU copyright exceptions.

•
“Fully machine-generated outputs should remain unprotected” while “AI-assisted works require harmonized 
protection criteria.”

Page 11 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

•
A statutory remuneration scheme is essential to bridge the growing value gap between creators and AI 
developers.

•
The current “fragmented governance landscape underscores the need for more coherent, cross-sector 
institutional responses.”

•
The EU risks legal uncertainty, market concentration, and cultural homogenization.

European Union (EU) AI Act

The EU is leading the way with AI regulation. The EU enacted the Artificial Intelligence Act 
 (AI Act) which deals 
with a range of regulatory and consumer protection issues relating to AI. The AI Act does not focus on IP but does 
regulate deep fakes. Under the AI Act, people who use AI systems to create deep fakes are required to clearly 
disclose that the content has been artificially created or manipulated by labelling the AI output as artificially created 
or manipulated, and to disclose its artificial origin (unless the use is authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate 
and prosecute a criminal offence). Where the content forms part of evidently artistic work, the transparency 
obligations are limited to disclosure of the existence of such generated or manipulated content in a way that does 
not hamper the display or enjoyment of the work: Art 50(4), AI Act 
.

After first being proposed by the European Commission in April 2021, the text of the EU AI Act was finally approved 
by the Council of the European Union (the final step in the legislative process for the creation of EU laws) on 21 
May 2024. This was the result of the culmination of 3 years of adjustment and debate.

The EU AI Act entered into force across all 27 EU Member States on 1 August 2024, and the enforcement of most 
of its provisions commence on 2 August 2026.

Developments regarding that AI Act include:

•
1 August 2024 — AI Act 
 entered into force in EU Member States;

•
12 July 2024 — AI Act published in the EU Official Journal;

•
21 May 2024 — EU AI Act approved by the Council of the European Union;

•
14 June 2023 — The European Parliament adopted its negotiating position on the AI Act, with 499 votes in 
favour, 28 against and 93 abstentions; and

•
6 December 2022 — The Council of the EU adopted its common position 
 (general approach) on the AI 
Act.

It has been reported 
 that the AI Act leaves a hole in respect of copyright protection. The argument is that the AI 
Act states that tech firms must comply with 2019 copyright law, which includes an exemption for text and data 
mining. It is asserted that AI companies are using the text and data mining exemption as defense to infringement in 
respect of training AI. The European Writers Council and other associated organisations assert 
 that the draft AI 
Code of Practice is a backwards step in respect of copyright.

China

On 29 November 2023, The Beijing Internet Court ruled that a set of AI-generated images of a Japanese school girl 
possessed "originality” and reflected human creative intellectual input. The court decided that this work should be

protected by copyright law. See Li (李) v Liu (刘) 
.

The court ruled that because it was a human being who set the relevant parameters for the AI model and ultimately 
selected the image in question, the final output is directly generated based on their intellectual input and “reflects 
the plaintiff’s personalised expression”.

A focus of Chinese courts appears to be the identification of “originality”. In the copyright case of AI Vincennes 
Diagram the court held that: “Whether the use of artificial intelligence to generate pictures reflects the personalized 
expression of the author needs to be judged on a case-by-case basis and cannot be generalized. In this case, from 
the point of view of the pictures involved, there are identifiable differences with the previous works. From the picture 
generation process involved.... The plaintiff designed the picture elements such as characters and their

Page 12 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

presentation mode through prompt words, and set the picture layout and composition through parameters, reflecting 
the plaintiff’s choice and arrangement.”

A second issue considered in China is the identification of the author. The second is the identification of the author. 
As one academic paper states: “The judgment of Filin v Baidu holds that neither the intelligent software itself nor the 
software developers and users can be the authors of artificial intelligence works, so such works cannot constitute 
works under copyright law. Later, a number of judgments held that works automatically generated by software 
contain the intellectual input of natural persons to choose and arrange, and can be regarded as works which are 
protected by copyright. It can be argued that Chinese courts have adopted the judicial principle of conditional 
protection for AI-generated works.”

In respect of patent protection of AI-generated inventions, Dr Thaler has filed a patent application in China and is 
waiting a result.

New Zealand

In considering Dr Thaler’s patent application, in March 2023, the New Zealand High Court decided that an AI 
system cannot be named as an inventor on a New Zealand patent. Based on this decision, inventions generated by 
an AI are not considered to be eligible for patent protection in New Zealand. See Thaler v Commissioner of Patents.
References: Thaler v Commissioner of Patents (2023) 170 IPR 460;  NZHC 554

In New Zealand, copyright can subsist in AI generated works. The New Zealand position mirrors the UK position.

In respect of copyright protection, the Copyright Act 1994 (NZ) 
 provides that in the case of a literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic work which is “computer generated”, copyright may subsist and the author of such a work is “the 
person by whom the arrangements necessary for the creation of the work are undertaken”. A “computer generated 
work” is a work generated by a computer in circumstances such that there is no human author of the work.

Global AI Principles

Various industry and public bodies have voluntarily adopted AI Principles, some of which include principles relating 
to AI.

For example, various members of the News Media Alliance have adopted “Global AI Principles 
” that include, eg 
respect for the intellectual property of creators, obligations to prevent AI developers from using the member’s 
content for AI training without a negotiated licence, and obligations on rightsholders to effectively to enforce their 
rights, and where applicable, require attribution and remuneration. See Global Principles on Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) 
.

The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Principles on Artificial Intelligence promote 
AI that is innovative and trustworthy and that respects human rights and democratic values. They were adopted in 
May 2019 by OECD member countries when they approved the OECD Council Recommendation of the Council on 
Artificial Intelligence 
.

The OECD AI Principles 
 are the first such principles signed up to by governments. They include concrete 
recommendations for public policy and strategy, and their general scope ensures they can be applied to AI 
developments around the world.

The governments of the Group of Seven (G7) announced in a “G7 Leaders’ Statement on the Hiroshima AI Process

” the launch of a set of International Guiding Principles 
 and an International Code of Conduct 
 designed to 
encourage international cooperation in the effective governance of artificial intelligence.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in China has also published a Global AI Governance Initiative 
.

Other Resources

AI machinations publishing — Copyrighting Books That Contain AI-Generated Material

Page 13 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

European Commission — G7 Leaders’ Statement on the Hiroshima AI Process

European Commission — Hiroshima Process International Guiding Principles for Advanced AI system

European Commission — Hiroshima Process International Code of Conduct for Advanced AI Systems

European Parliament — Artificial Intelligence Act: deal on comprehensive rules for trustworthy AI — 9 December 
2023

European Patent Office — Decision — J 8/20 (Designation of inventor/DABUS)

Getty Images — Getty Images Statement — 17 January 2023

Library of Congress Blogs — Looking Forward: The U.S. Copyright Office’s AI Initiative in 2024

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China — Global AI Governance Initiative — 20 October 2023

News Media Alliance — Global Principles on Artificial Intelligence (AI)

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development — Recommendation of the Council on Artificial 
Intelligence

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development — AI Principles overview

Publications Office of the European Union — Trends and developments in artificial intelligence — Challenges to the 
intellectual property rights framework: final report

The Atlantic — Revealed: The Authors Whose Pirated Books Are Powering Generative AI — 19 August 2023

The Verge — AI companies have all kinds of arguments against paying for copyrighted content — 5 November 
2023

United States Copyright Office — Re: Zarya of the Dawn (Registration # VAu001480196)

United States Copyright Office — Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by 
Artificial Intelligence — 16 March 2023

United States Copyright Office — Artificial Intelligence Study

United States Copyright Office — Copyright and Artificial Intelligence

United States Copyright Office — Letter on AI and Copyright Initiative Update

United States Copyright Office — A.I., Art, and Copyright: The Human Element That Makes All the Difference

United States Patent and Trademark Office — 2019 Request for Comments on Intellectual Property Protection for 
Artificial Intelligence Innovation

United States Patent and Trademark Office — Media Release — USPTO releases report on artificial intelligence 
and intellectual property policy

United States Patent and Trademark Office — Guidance Page — Artificial Intelligence

UK Intellectual Property Office — Artificial Intelligence and Intellectual Property: copyright and patents: Government 
response to consultation — 28 June 2022

Page 14 of 14
International developments in IP laws and AI

UK Intellectual Property Office — Examining patent applications involving artificial neural networks

UK Intellectual Property Office — The government’s code of practice on copyright and AI

UK Parliament — Connected tech: AI and creative technology — 30 August 2023

Wired — How One Author Pushed the Limits of AI Copyright — 17 April 2024

End of Document