| About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2026 LexisNexis

Matthew Duff

User Name: Matthew Duff

Date and Time: Sunday, 1 March 2026 11:53 am AEST

Job Number: 277085587

Document (1)

1. Overview — Artificial intelligence and IP

Client/Matter: -None-

Matthew Duff

Overview — Artificial intelligence and IP

Maintained

IP and AI generated works

Artificial intelligence (AI) is being used to generate new works, such as art, music and written works. AI is also being 
used to create new products, new drugs and new formulas.

A sub-field of AI is generative AI. A well-known example of generative AI is ChatGPT.

Generative AI focuses on creating new content, rather than simply analysing or classifying existing data.

Typically, a generative AI system will learn from existing data. For example, a generative AI system that is designed 
to create art will be trained on a large set of existing art works.

Generative AI raises many Intellectual Property (IP) questions such as:

•
Who owns the IP in what is created by the AI system?

•
Is it possible to obtain a patent for what is created by the AI system?

•
Can an AI system be an inventor or author?

•
Is it an IP infringement to use existing works as training data?

•
Could use of what is created by the AI system be an IP infringement?

•
How does one protect an AI system that they develop?

•
How is IP law likely to develop?

•
What is happening in other countries?

In summary, IP law in Australia is relatively certain for some of these core questions, but less certain when applied 
to more complex AI scenarios. For example, the law in Australia is as follows:

•
An AI system cannot own intellectual property.

•
An AI system cannot be the sole inventor on a patent.

•
An AI system cannot be the sole author of a copyright work.

•
An AI system cannot be the sole designer of a registered design.

•
It is likely copyright infringement to train an AI system using existing copyright works unless a licence is 
obtained from the copyright owner.

•
A work generated by an AI system could infringe another’s patent, trade mark or design, even if that 
patent, trade mark or design is not used in the training of the AI system.

What is less certain:

•
IP issues involving AI and trade marks.

•
Whether an AI system can be a co-inventor of a patented invention or can be used to assist creating a 
patentable invention.

•
Whether an AI system used by a human can create copyright protected works.

•
Who should be the owner of IP where an AI system is used to create the IP.

•
Who is responsible if an AI system produces a work that is substantially similar to another’s work, and if so, 
is the AI generated work a copyright infringement of the other work.

•
How to best protect the IP in an AI system.

There are many ongoing developments in respect of AI and IP, and the law will develop rapidly in this space.

Page 2 of 3
Overview — Artificial intelligence and IP

See IP and AI generated works.

Copyright infringement and AI

Three key copyright infringement issues arise because generative AI focuses on creating new content, and 
generative AI systems learn from (or a trained on) large datasets. These issues are:

•
Is it copyright infringement to use existing copyright works to train an AI system?

•
Could the output created by an AI system be an infringement of copyright in one or more of the works used 
to train the AI system?

•
Who is responsible if an AI system produces a work that is substantially similar to another’s work, and if so, 
is the AI generated work a copyright infringement of the other work.

The first question relates to works that are input into the AI system. The second and third questions relate to works 
that are output from the AI system.

Typically, a generative AI system will learn from existing data. For example, a generative AI system that is designed 
to create art will be trained on a large set of existing art works. This art has to be input into the AI system. This 
typically will involve copying the artwork into the training database or into a computer’s memory to train the AI 
system. This act of copying an existing work is likely to be copyright infringement.

Where an AI system is trained on a huge database of existing works, whether that is art, music, books, websites or 
the like, there is likely to be an act of copyright infringement in respect of each work that is used.

The developers of AI systems are aware of this risk. They have stated that defences will apply such as “fair use”. 
However, the “fair use” defence may end up being narrowly applied in this area, and is only applicable if the copying 
took place in the United States. There is no general “fair use” defence in Australia. At the present time, there are 
many pending copyright cases against AI developers in the United States and in England, but none in Australia.

A work that is created by an AI system could, depending on the circumstances, be a copyright infringement of a 
work used to train the AI system. For example, if the output of the AI system is a work of art showing Superman 
flying a jet plane, this could be copyright infringement of existing works of Superman.

It is becoming common for contracts for the procurement of IT systems, SaaS services or software licenses to 
include an AI clause that deal with the IP issues relating to the use of AI. For example, the clause may prevent the 
use of customer data to train AI systems.

See Copyright infringement and AI.

Future impacts of AI on IP laws

AI technology is developing rapidly. IP law relating to AI is also developing, perhaps not as rapidly.

There are policy proposals being considered by government in Australia and elsewhere. Outside of Australia, there 
are many pending court cases that are likely to have impact on Australian law.

One key IP issue that is likely to be subject to consideration involves a human and an AI machine working together 
to create a work or an invention. In this case, the human may contribute intellectual creativity in conjunction with the 
AI system. The human could provide detailed instructions to the AI system or could make modifications to what the 
AI system creates. This could be a recursive creative process, with various rounds of interaction and improvement, 
involving joint work between the AI system and the human. In this case, why should the human’s intellectual 
creativity not be recognised? What level and type of creativity should be protected?

There is also likely to be developments to enable the efficient use or licensing of existing works to train AI systems 
that take into account the interest of owners of existing copyright rights.

Page 3 of 3
Overview — Artificial intelligence and IP

See Future impacts of AI on IP laws.

International developments in IP laws and AI

IP law is not the same throughout the world. Other countries take a different view of IP law in relation to AI issues.

Although one may obtain IP protection throughout the world (due to various treaties and local laws), there is not one 
global IP asset for a work or an invention. There is an IP asset on a country-by-country basis, not a worldwide 
basis. For example, the author of a book will own an Australian copyright asset for that book, a New Zealand 
copyright asset for that book, a Singapore copyright asset for that book, and so on.

In relation to the core IP issues discussed in this guidance note:

•
Patent law in respect of AI being an inventor or patent owner is generally similar in most jurisdictions.

•
Copyright subsistence and ownership issues are generally similar in most jurisdictions, although China 
appears to be taking a more progressive view.

•
Copyright infringement issues may differ between jurisdictions, primarily because defences to infringement 
are different.

•
There are many lawsuits pending in the US and the UK involving the intersection of AI and IP.

•
Governments, patent offices and industry bodies throughout the world are considering policy issues 
involving these issues, balancing the encouragement of creativity with the need to protect what already has 
been created.

See International developments in IP laws and AI.

End of Document