8 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

GALAXY ELECTRONICS PTY LIMITED v SEGA ENTERPRISES 
LIMITED and Another * 
GOTTLIEB ENTERPRISES LIMITED v SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED 
and Another

General Division: Lockhart, Wilcox, Lindgren JJ

New South Wales District Registry

13 February, 23 May 1997

A

B

Copyright -
Cinematograph film -
Whether series of images generated by 
computer games constitute cinematograph films -
Whether requirement C 
of frames -
Whether visual images' 'embodied" in program or integrated 
circuit -
Whether requirement that visual images "embodied" in same 
form as they later appeared -
Time of "publication" -
Whether 
requirement to choose between the classifications of subject matters 
protected by copyright law -
Copyright Act 1968 (Cth), ss 10, 24 -
Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth), ss 5, 24.

Words and Phrases -
Cinematograph film -
Embodied. 
D

The respondents were the manufacturer and exclusive Australian licensee of two 
video games (the Games). Each of the appellants imported into Australia machines 
containing copies of the computer program that generated visual images and 
sounds constituting one of the Games. The Games constituted a series of images 
shown on the screen resembling a traditional movie film. The main part of each 
Game required the players' interaction, for example by "shooting" the "villain" 
with their make believe weapon or "input" device, so that the various assaults E 
progressed according to the script. Thus, except for the opening and closing 
sequences of each Game, the events represented on the screen varied according to 
the accuracy of the player. However, the Games had a capacity to produce only a 
limited number of variants to the theme, and if the player responded at all times 
with the correct "inputs", only the one version of the story appeared on the 
screen. 
It was common ground that s 24(2) of the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth) 
precluded the Games from being protected as computer programs under Pt III of 
the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth) (the Act). However, if the series of images generated 
F 
by the Games constituted cinematograph films within s 10 of the Act, the 
appellants' actions amounted to infringement of the respondent's copyright in the 
Games. 
Section 10 of the Act defined "cinematograph film" as:

" ... the aggregate of the visual images embodied in an article or thing so as 
to be capable by the use of that article or thing: 
(a) 
of being shown as a moving picture; or 
(b) 
of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of which G 
it can be so shown; 
and includes the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a sound-track 
associated with such visual images;"

* [EDrroR's NOTE: See decision _filst instance reported at 69 FCR 268.]

A

B

c

D

E

F

G

75 FCR 8] 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA 
9

Section 24 of the Act provided that:

" ... sounds or visual images shall be taken to have been embodied in an 
article or thing if the article or thing has been so treated in relation to those 
sounds or visual images that those sounds or visual images are capable, with 
or without the aid of some other device, of being reproduced from the article 
or thing." 
The trial judge held that the Games were cinematograph films, rejecting the 
argument that an embodiment of a visual image required something in the nature 
of a frame, as on a reel of film, of which the images are a reflection. The trial 
judge held that s 24 of the Act applied quite literally in that the words in s 24

"some other device" , referred to the input device used by the player. 
The appellants argued that the trial judge should have determined whether the 
Games were properly classified as cinematograph films or computer programs as it 
was not possible that the Act could protect one subject matter both as a "work" 
and a "subject matter other than a work". They also challenged the trial judge's 
finding in regard to frames and emphasised the fact that the individual scenes in 
the Games were rarely identical, a phenomenon, they argued, which had no 
precedent in cinematography. 
In relation to the words in the definition of "cinematograph film", "the visual 
images embodied in an article or thing", the appellants argued that unlike film or 
video images, the computer generated images visible to the players of the Games 
did not exist before the moment of visibility and therefore could not be said to 
represent an embodiment of pre-existing images. 
The appellants also contended that the requirement of "publication" had not 
been met, submitting that since some of the potential combinations of images may 
never be seen and certainly would be seen at different times, a time of publication 
could not be identified, or at least there would be numerous times of publication. 
Held, dismissing the appeals: 
(I) The definition of "cinematograph film" in ss 10 and 24 should be construed 
widely as the sections were intended to cover new technologies. There was no 
warrant for reading into the definition a requirement offrames. (16G-17B) 
(2) There was no requirement to choose between a classification of the Games 
as a "cinematograph film" and a "computer program". (17B) 
(3) The word "embodioo" in the definition of "cinematograph film" refers to 
the giving of a material or discernible form to an abstract principle or concept. 
(18B) 
(4) The abstraction must pre-exist the material manifestation. (l8B) 
(5) The aggregate of the visual images generated by the playing of each of the 
Games constituted a "cinematograph film". They existed before the Games were 
played, both in the minds of their creators and the drawings and models they made. 
It did not matter that the images were embodied in the computer programs or 
integrated circuits in· a different form from the form in which they appeared on the 
screen, nor did it matter that the images seen by players were created by computer 
calculations only immediately before their appearance on the screen. (18C-E, F, 
2OC, F, 23E-F)

Stem Electronics Inc v Kaufoum (1982) 669 F (2d) 852; Midway Mig Co v Artie 
International Inc (1983) 704 F (2d) 1009, applied. 
(6) By Lindgren J: All the potential visual images in the Games were embodied 
in the integrated circuits and therefore there was a single time of publication in 
respect of all of them. (24B) 
(7) In relation to the requirement of s 24 of the Act that the article or thing "has 
been so treated in relation to those sounds or visual images", there must have been 
a treatment of the article or thing that is related to specific sounds or visual images. 
(20E)

Appeal against decision of Burchett J (1996) 69 FCR 268, dismissed.

10 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS

CASES CITED

The following cases are cited in the judgments:

Jefferys v Boosey (1954) 4 HLC 815; 10 ER 681. 
Midway MIg Co v Artie International Inc (1983) 704 F (2d) 1009. 
Stem Electronics Inc v Kaufman (1982) 669 F (2d) 852.

ApPEAL

J Burnside QC and J Baird, for the appellants.

D Catterns QC and R Webb, for the respondents.

23 May 1997

[(1997)

A

B

Curadv vult

LOCKHART J. I have read the reasons for judgment of Wilcox J and agree 
with them. I also agree with the additional observations of Lindgren J. 
C

WILCOX J. These two appeals raise an important question of copyright law: 
whether computer-generated moving images fall within the statutory definition 
of "cinematograph film". If this question is answered affirmatively, the images 
are subject to copyright protection under Pt IV of the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth) 
(the Act). That Part relates to "copyright in subject-matter other than works", 
including cinematograph films. If it is answered negatively, the images will D 
usually be devoid of copyright protection. I should explain why this is so.

The reason for exclusion of Pt III protection

It is common ground between the parties that the moving images with which 
these appeals are concerned are not protected under Pt III of the Act. That Part 
deals with "copyright in original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic 
works". The term "literary work" is defined in s 10 of the Act specifically to 
include "a computer program or compilation of computer programs". But for E 
one factor, the moving images would be protected as an adaptation of a literary 
work: see s 32(l)(a)(vi) of the Act. According to counsel's analysis, the only 
reason for excluding the images from protection under Pt III is that s 24(2) of 
the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth) applies. I agree with this conclusion. It 
seems to me that s 24(2) of the Circuit Layouts Act excludes any protection of 
these moving images under Pt III of the Act. This will usually be the case in 
relation to imported computer programs. 
The term "circuit layout" is defined by s 6 of the Circuit Layouts Act as F 
meaning' 'a representation, fixed in any material form, of the three-dimensional 
location of the active and passive elements and interconnections making up an 
integrated circuit". An "integrated circuit" is:

"a circuit, whether in a final form or an intermediate form, the purpose, or 
one of the purposes, of which is to perform an electronic function, being a 
circuit in which the active and passive elements, and any of the 
interconnections, are integrally formed in or on a piece of materiaL" 
G 
Section 16 of the Circuit Layouts Act deals with the question who is the 
owner of what the Act calls "EL rights", the nature of which are specified by 
s 17. The abbreviation, "EL" refers to "eligible layouts". An "eligible 
layout" is:

"an originalcircuit layout:

75 FCR 8] 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA (Wilcox J) 
11

A 
(a) 
the maker of which was, at the time the layout was made, an eligible

B

C

D

E

F

G

person; or 
(b) 
that was first commercially exploited in Australia or in an eligible 
foreign country." 
Section 24 of the Circuit Layouts Act provides:

"(1) Where: 
(a) an eligible layout is commercially exploited, whether in 
Australia or elsewhere, by, or with the licence of, the owners of 
the EL rights in the layout; and 
(b) a person acquires a copy of the layout, or an integrated circuit 
made in accordance with the layout, as a result of that 
commercial exploitation; 
It IS not an infringement of the EL rights in the layout if the person 
commercially exploits the copy or the integrated circuit in Australia. 
(2) In spite of section 37 of the Copyright Act and section 38 of that Act 
to the extent that section 38 applies to imported articles, where the 
commercial exploitation of an integrated circuit containing a copy or 
adaptation of a work (being an integrated circuit made in accordance with 
an eligible layout) is not, under this section, an infringement of the EL 
rights in the layout, that commercial exploitation is not an infringement of 
the copyright in that work unless the making of that copy or adaptation 
was an infringement of that copyright. 
(3) Expressions used in subsection (2) that are used and defined in the 
Copyright Act have the same respective meanings in that subsection as 
they have in that Act." 
For present purposes, the critical element in s 24 is the exclusion, by subs 
(2), of the protection that ss 37 and 38 of the Copyright Act would otherwise 
provide in respect of the commercial exploitation of an integrated circuit, made 
in accordance with an eligible layout which contains a copy or adaptation of a 
work. Sections 37 and 38 of the Copyright Act deal with infringements of 
works, including literary and artistic works. 
The respondents to the present appeals accept the above result, in relation to 
Pt III of the Act. But they seek to enforce Pt IV against the appellants.

The games 
The respondents, Sega Enterprises Pty Limited (Sega) and Avel Pty Limited 
(Avel), are respectively the manufacturer and exclusive Australian licensee of 
two video games, "Virtua Cop" and "Daytona USA Twin". The appellant, 
Galaxy Electronic Pty Limited (Galaxy), imported into Australia machines 
containing copies of the computer program that generated the visual images and 
sounds constituting the game "Virtua Cop" and displayed them for sale or hire 
at its premises. The appellant, Gottlieb Electronics Pty Limited (Gottlieb), did 
the same things in relation to "Daytona USA Twin". Both appellants concede 
that, if the video games are a "cinematograph film", their actions constitute an 
infringement of the respondents' rights; but they say the games are not 
cinematograph films. 
It is not necessary to describe both games in detail. They are similar in 
nature. The description given by the learned trial judge, Burchett J, was not 
challenged. I gratefully adopt it.

"There are two video games with which the cases are concerned, one 
entitled 'Virtua Cop' and the other 'Daytona USA'. Each presents on the

12 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

video screen a series of images resembling, more or less, a traditional A 
movie film. In the case of Virtua Cop, an extremely simple but violent tale 
is told of assaults by police upon a criminal organisation. In the case of 
Daytona USA, what is involved is car racing. The parties were agreed that 
it is sufficient to concentrate upon Virtua Cop, since the two video games 
are constructed upon the same principle. In Virtua Cop, the protagonists 
are two police officers (with whom the players of the game identify) 
whose investigations are resisted, first, at a cargo wharf, next, at a B 
construction site, and finally at their antagonists' evil headquarters. 
To begin with, there is a brief introduction, followed by the main part of 
the game in which the player must keep shooting quickly and accurately, 
with a make-believe weapon or 'input' device, at the correct villainous 
targets, so that the various assaults will progress according to the script. At 
the end, there is a triumphant finale, when the police congratulate each 
other and the dastards are led away in handcuffed defeat. Only the 
successful player will reach this denouement, and only the very skilled can C 
possibly do so without numerous setbacks along the way, caused by 
misdirected responses, or failures to respond, to the actions depicted on the 
screen. For example, if the player's shot misses a criminal, the player may 
himself be shot by the criminal; and if this happens a predetermined 
number of times, the assault fails, and the game ends. Also, each time a 
criminal is merely winged, he may react differently, depending on where 
he has been hit. 
Thus, except for the opening and closing sequences, the events D 
represented on the screen will show differences from screening to 
screening, except where the player's responses are all correct. 
What this means, it will be appreciated, is that the apparatus is designed 
to screen the simple story only when the correct responses to a series of 
cues are fed into it by the player; and when incorrect responses are given, 
a number of variations will result." 
Burchett J detailed the way "Virtua Cop" was created. He said: 
E 
"Graphic designers developed the scenes, and representations of the 
characters. In doing so, they made drawings and models, and decided, for 
instance; how a particular character would walk. Sets were made up. A 
'test version' was prepared on a computer and copied onto a video tape. 
Further detailed sketches of scenes to be depicted on the screen were 
prepared by hand. These sketches were used as the basis for the 
preparation of the computer programme, according to which particular F 
scenes were ultimately enabled to be depicted on the screen. The 
programme itself was extremely sophisticated. It calculated the three-
dimensional position of each part of each object and character at each 
stage of all movements. An example of the sophistication involved is the 
windscreen of a car, which is shown three-dimensionally, with a 
superimposed two-dimensional image of a reflection of the sky appearing 
on it. 
Sound effects, music, and very simple dialogue were also required. Over G 
eighty sound effects were selected from a sound library or created, and 
then manipulated, for inclusion in the programme. Dialogue was recorded, 
and that recording was also manipulated and included in the programme. 
Music was added after composition on a synthesiser. 
When all the work had been completed and was brought together, it was

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

75 FCR 81 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA (Wilcox J) 
13

represented by a highly specialized piece of computer equipment, suitable, 
and suitable only, for bringing Virtu a Cop to the screen. Although, as I 
have said, sketches, models and video tape were used in the course of the 
creation of the programme, in the finished product, the screen images were 
not represented by anything comparable to the tiny translucent images 
which characterize the original technology of cinematograph film. A closer 
analogy could be drawn to video tape, containing magnetic fields that may 
be transformed into visual images upon a screen. But the respondents 
argue that even this analogy misses the mark. According to their 
contention, Virtua Cop is not represented in any form until it is born on 
the screen out of the union between the player's input and the computer 
programme that calculates the three-dimensional reference points, not 
images, by reference to which the images themselves are made to appear 
on the screen. The respondents say that the visual images were not stored 
in any manner; mathematical co-ordinates of models of objects, together 
with animation and texture mapping data, were stored in digital form, and 
are used by the controlling programme to create images on the screen. In 
doing so, the respondents say, the 'microcomputer controls the sequence 
of visual displays and aural effects in response to a player's actions and 
this generates a different game play for each player within the overall 
limitations of objects and scenes available to be generated by the 
controlling program'. Thus, they contend, 'the visual imagery ... is an 
artefact of real-time computer graphics in that the images on the screen are 
synthesised on the fly by the controlling program'. On this basis, their 
argument asserts it is 'not correct to say that the 2-dimensional screen 
images themselves are stored in the computer like some form of "digital 
movie" and simply played back during the game'. " 
The parties called "the respondents" by his Honour are, of course, the 
present appellants. 
Burchett J noted that the expert called to give evidence on behalf of Sega and 
A vel, while disputing the ultimate conclusion, conceded the technical accuracy 
of the proposition put by Galaxy and Gottlieb.

The trial judge's reasoning

At the beginning of his reasoning, Burchett J made an important observation:

" ... there is a significant concession involved in the proposition that the 
influence of the player's actions is confined within 'the overall limitations 
of objects and scenes available to be generated by the controlling 
program'. What this must mean is that stored within the computer is the 
capacity to produce, and the limitation to producing only, the co-ordinates 
and other effects necessary to constitute upon the screen a particular 
limited number of variants upon the basic theme. Of course, if a player, to 
use the technical jargon, responds at all times with the correct 'inputs', 
only the one version of the story will appear upon the screen." 
His Honour then set out the definition of "cinematograph film" in s 10 of 
the Act and its amplification in s 24. Section 10 provides that, unless the 
contrary intention appears:

"'cinematograph film' means the aggregate of the visual images 
embodied in an article or thing so as to be capable by the use of that 
article or thing: 
(a) of being shown as a moving picture; or

14 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

(b) of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of A 
which it can be so shown; 
and includes the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a sound-track 
associated with such visual images;" 
Section 24 reads:

"For the purposes of this Act, sounds or visual images shaU be taken to 
have been embodied in an article or thing if the article or thing has been so 
treated in relation to those sounds or visual images that those sounds or 
visual images are capable, with or without the aid of some other device, of B 
being reproduced from the article or thing." 
Burchett J commented:

"The expert evidence adduced by the respondents appeared to seize upon 
the expression 'the visual images embodied in an article or thing'.

Plainly enough, what is seen by the viewer is shown as a moving 
picture; but the point made was 'that there does not exist inside the 
computer anywhere a 2-dimensional image [of what appears on the C 
screen]. That 2-dimensional image is simply computed from looking at aU 
the three-dimensional vertices of the polygon model [this is a reference to 
the way in which the computer apprehends objects] and doing what is a 
clever arithmetic on it'. The validity of this argument must depend on how 
the word 'embodied' is understood. This word, as is made clear by The 
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (1993), generally refers to the 
giving of 'a material or discernible form to (an abstract principle, concept, D 
etc)' ." 
His Honour caUed in aid the Lord Chancellor's song in "Iolanthe", saying it 
indicated the "precise sense" conveyed by "embodied":

"The Law is the true embodiment 
Of everything that's exceUent. 
It has no kind of fault or flaw, 
And I, my Lords, embody the Law." 
He also referred to the words of a real Lord ChanceUor, Lord Cranworth, in E 
Jefferys v Boosey (1854) 4 HLC 815; 10 ER 681:

"So long as a literary work remains unpublished at aU, it has no existence, 
except in the mind of its author, or in the papers in which he, for his own 
convenience, may have embodied it." 
The trial judge said:

"When Lord Cranworth used the word 'embodied' in that way, I think he 
was speaking of an author giving his creation a form in which it could be 
held for continued existence and use. In my opinion, that is the essence of F 
the meaning also intended to be conveyed by the Report on Computer 
Software Protection (1995) of the Copyright Law Review Committee, 
chaired by Sheppard J, at par 10.142, where the Committee referred to the 
importation of an integrated circuit in order 'to import a copyright work 
embodied in that integrated circuit' ." 
Burchett J rejected the notion that an embodiment of a visual image required 
something in the nature of a frame, as on a reel of film, of which the image is a G 
reflection. He cited a number of judicial decisions favouring a liberal 
construction of copyright legislation. He said the legislative history shows 
Parliament intended to take a broad view in relation to copyright in a film,

"and not to tie the copyright to any particular technology". He cited the United 
Kingdom's Gregory Report (1952) and the Second Reading Speech for the

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

75 FCR 8] 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA (Wilcox J) 
15

Australian Copyright Bill 1986, both of which refer to the technical 
interchangeability of cinematograph film and video tape. Burchett J commented 
that, against this background:

" ... it seems to me that the definition of 'cinematograph film', expressed 
as it is in terms of the result achieved rather than of the means employed, 
points very strongly to an intention to cover new technologies which do 
actually achieve the same result. This view is, of course, strengthened by 
the terms of s 24. That section was plainly inserted to ensure that the word 
'embodied' did not receive a narrow construction. It applies quite literally 
in the present case. With the aid of 'some other device', namely, the input 
device utilised by the player of the video game, the apparatus is capable of 
reproducing quite precisely the aggregate of the visual images created by 
Sega Enterprises Limited so that they are shown as a moving picture. To 
demonstrate this, it is sufficient, of course, to refer to the visual images 
created to be shown upon the reception by the apparatus of the 'correct' 
inputs. In any case, as I have already pointed out, the variations are within 
predetermined limits ... " 
After referring to other matters, Burchett J noted the applicants' alternative 
argument that the subject machines constituted a "sound recording". He 
pointed 
out 
that, 
if 
the 
computer-generated 
images 
constituted 
a 
"cinematograph film", this argument must fail; s 23( I) of the Act provides that 
"sounds embodied in a sound track associated with visual images forming part 
of cinematograph film shall be deemed not to be a sound recording".

The arguments on appeal

The appellants' counsel. submit that the trial judge should have determined 
whether the video games should be classified as cinematograph films or as 
computer programs, but failed to do so. They say this was necessary because 
the Act "does not contemplate the possibility that one subject matter can be 
protected both as a work and as a subject matter other than a work". If 
Burchett J had made a choice, they argue, he would have held the games were 
each a computer program, and so a "literary work". The result would have 
been that ss 37 and 38 of the Act operated to exclude a finding of infringement. 
Next, counsel argue that the trial judge erred in rejecting their clients' 
contention regarding frames. They say:

"The reference to 'the aggregate of the visual images' is a reference to the 
frames which have always been the basic element of cinematograph films. 
It cannot be a reference to individual visual elements within a single frame 
because the individual images on a single frame are not capable of being 
shown as a moving picture. It is the sequence of frames which enables a 
cinematograph film to create an illusion of motion. Furthermore, if the 
images on a single frame are the images referred to in the definition, then 
the single frame would constitute a cinematograph film. 
The video games in this case do not embody a plurality of individual 
frames. Rather, they generate individual frames from moment to moment 
by combining: 
(a) data about individual 3-dimensional objects; 
(b) input data which dictates, within limits, the position of those 
objects; 
(c) data about the stage which the player has reached in the 
particular instance of the game."

16 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

Finally, counsel emphasise the distinctive nature of computer-generated A 
Images:

"A movie which is encoded in a form capable of being decoded and 
displayed by a computer remains a 'cinematograph film'. The techniques 
employed here are entirely different. Each 'frame' of the visual display is 
generated at the moment it is displayed. It is generated not by decoding 
information about an existing image, but by calculating the position and 
aspect of each object and computing its 2-dimensional appearance from B 
that data. 
The content of each individual frame during the particular instance of a 
game is generated 'on the fly' by the program, and may not have an exact 
counterpart in any other instance of the game. The fact that individual 
scenes are similar in various instances of the game deflects attention from 
the much more significant fact that the individual scenes are rarely 
identical. That is a phenomenon which has no precedent in cinematogra-

~y. 
C 
Accordingly, the subject matter of the case does not comfortably fit 
within the definition of 'cinematograph film', even if it can be made to fit 
by adopting a liberal approach to the task, as His Honour did. However, 
the subject matter fits exactly the definition of 'computer program'. As a 
matter of construction, the subject matter should be regarded as computer 
programs.' , 
Counsel for the respondents say these submissions contain two essential D 
errors: they confuse the subject matter in which copyright subsists with the 
physical embodiment or material form in which it is made, and they attempt to 
limit the concept of cinematograph film to· frames. 
In relation to the first matter, counsel argue:

"It has always been the case that no copyright can subsist in a work (and, 
more recently, subject matter other than work) until it is 'made': that is 
'reduced to' some material form or 'embodied in' some physical thing. In E 
addition to the obvious need for copyright subject-matter to be made so 
that it can be identified, it is also necessary in the international system of 
copyright for a work to have sufficient physical connection with its 
country of origin. The distinction always remains between the physical 
form in which a work or other subject-matter is made and the subject-
matter itself.' , 
Counsel for the respondents say Burchett J identified this distinction; it 
provided the basis for his construction of the definition of "cinematograph F 
film" in s 10 and of s 24. They argue it is wrong to speak of dual protection for 
a single subject-matter:

"The subject-matter of each of the Respondents' cinematograph films is 
an aggregate of images and sounds. The subject-matter of each of the 
Respondents' computer programs is a set of instructions. The instructions 
affect the functioning of a device with the aid of which the images and 
sounds are reproduced, in terms of s 24." 
G

Conclusions

There was a dispute between counsel as to whether it is technically accurate 
to say that computer-generated images are not framed. I do not find it necessary 
to reach a view about that question. I accept the respondents' submission that

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

75 FCR 8] 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA (Wilcox J) 
17

there is no warrant for reading into the definition of "cinematograph film" a 
requirement of frames. This element is not included within the definition. 
I agree with Burchett J that it would be wrong to interpret narrowly the 
definition of • 'cinematograph film" in ss 10 and 24. These provisions were 
intended to cover new technologies, the emphasis being on the end product -
motion pictures -
rather than the means adopted to create those pictures. 
Nonetheless, the definition will apply to any particular new technology only if 
that technology satisfies the words of the definition, liberally read. 
I also accept that Burchett J was not required to choose between a 
classification of the video games as a "cinematograph film" and a "computer 
program". If the video games fell within the definition of "cinematograph 
film", the distinction as to subject matter postulated by counsel for the 
respondents would apply. 
It is necessary to distinguish between three things: the integrated circuit, the 
computer program and the visual images. As the definition used in the Circuit 
Layouts Act demonstrates, an integrated circuit is a physical thing, an electrical 
circuit containing active and passive elements. It is protected by s 19(2) of the 
Circuit Layouts Act, although subject to the limitations contained elsewhere in 
that Act. A computer program, as previously mentioned, is a set of instructions. 
As I understand the situation, the program is stored in the computer's memory, 
which memory comprises a series of specially-configured integrated circuits. So 
it is covered by the Circuit Layouts Act. At the same time, as an expression of 
instructions, it falls readily within the traditional copyright concept of "literary 
work". As earlier stated, that term is defined by s 10 of the Act so as to include 
a computer program, a term that is itself defined by s 10. So Pt III of the Act 
applies to any copying or adaptation of a computer program, but subject to the 
considerable limitations on this application effected by s 24 of the Circuit 
Layouts Act. The visual images are the product of the interaction of the 
computer program with the integrated circuit. They are not part of the program; 
they are its effect. 
The appellants' submission about choice of categories must be evaluated 
against this background. The submission seems to assume that it would not be 
possible for anyone to copy the visual images created by the Sega graphic 
designers without copying the computer program, and perhaps vice versa. This 
is not so. Copiers could take advantage of the intellectual effort of the Sega 
designers in either of two ways. A person having the requisite skills and 
equipment could open up the machine and microchip housings and copy the 
circuit layout and program. This would involve an infringement of the Circuit 
Layouts Act, at least. For present purposes, that is immaterial. What is material 
is that the copier would not be copying any of the visual images that the 
program is capable of creating, but merely the circuit designs and program 
instructions that make the images possible. Theoretically at least, the copier 
might do this without knowing what images were capable of being generated 
by the layout and program being copied. 
Conversely, it would be possible for a person who had no knowledge of 
computer technology to copy the visual images that the computer program was 
capable of generating; not by copying the program but by copying the images 
themselves. Fot example, the copier could place a video camera in front of the 
game screen and video the images that appeared during the course of a game. 
The resultant video film would comprise only that game; it would reflect the 
player input of that particular game. But it would comprise images, and

18 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

sequences of images, devised by the graphic designers; even though there had A 
been no copying of the circuit layout or computer program. 
Against this background, I have come to share the opinion of Burchett J that 
the critical question in these cases is the application to them of the word

"embodied". The definition of "cinematograph film" refers to "the aggregate 
of the visual images embodied in an article or thing ... ". Section 24 sets out 
circumstances under which "visual images shall be taken to have been 
embodied in an article or thing". 
B 
I also agree that the word "embodied" refers to the giving of a material or 
discernible form to an abstract principle or concept. The Lord Chancellor's

"Iolanthe" song neatly illustrates this meaning. According to his Lordship, the 
abstract concept of excellence achieves material manifestation in the Law; and 
the Law, in tum, is manifested in his noble person. 
It seems inherent in both the dictionary definition and the "Iolanthe" 
illustration that the abstraction must pre-exist the material manifestation. 
Counsel for the appellants argue that the images visible to players of the games C 
do not exist before the moment of visibility; accordingly, it cannot be said that 
they represent an embodiment of pre-existing images. Counsel make the point 
that computer-generated images are fundamentally different to film or video 
images; in the latter case the images are fixed on celluloid or videotape before 
the moment of projection and viewing. 
This analysis is superficially attractive; but, I think, unsound. The visual 
images depicted in these video games did exist before the game was played. D 
They existed in the minds of their creators and the drawings and models they 
made. The images were embodied in the computer program built into the video 
game machine so as to be capable, by the use of that program, of being shown 
as a moving picture. It does not matter that they were embodied in a different 
form; that is, three-dimension vertices of the polygon model, rather than a two-
dimensional image. The statutory definition says nothing about the form of 
embodiment. Nor does it matter that the images seen by players are created by 
computer calculations only immediately before their appearance on the screen E 
of the video game machine. Although that means, in a sense, that they are new, 
they are exact recreations of images previously devised by the graphic 
designers. Similarly, of course, it is unimportant that the images could not be 
seen on the screen as a moving picture until generated by the computer, any 
more than it matters that a length of video tape is incapable of being seen as a 
moving picture until passed through a video player. 
Counsel for the appellants emphasise the circumstance that the sequence of F 
images seen in any particular game reflects player input. It may be true that no 
two sequences will be identical. But that does not mean the sequence is 
incapable of coming within the definition of "cinematograph film". As is 
demonstrated by analogous American cases, a question of degree is involved. 
The question in those cases was whether the subject video game was an

"audiovisual work". The legislation defined "audiovisual works" as "works 
that consist of a series of related images which are intrinsically intended to be 
shown by the use of machines, or devices such as projectors, viewers, or G 
electronic equipment, together with accompanying sounds, if any, regardless of 
the nature of the material objects, such as films or tapes, in which the works are 
embodied". In Stem Electronics Inc v Kaufman (1982) 669 F (2d) 852 it was 
contended that there was no copyright in the subject game because it was 
neither fixed in a tangible medium of expression nor original. Both contentions

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

75 FCR 8] 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA (Wilcox J) 
19

arose from the fact that the sequence of some of the images appearing on the 
screen during each play of the game varied according to player actions. 
Speaking for the United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit, Newman J 
said (at 855-856):

"If the content of the audiovisual display were not affected by the 
participation of the player, there would be no doubt that the display itself, 
and not merely the written computer program, would be eligible for 
copyright. The display satisfies the statutory definition of an original 
'audiovisual work,' and the memory devices of the game satisfy the 
statutory requirement of a 'copy' in which the work is 'fixed'.

We agree with the District Court that the player's participation does not 
withdraw the audiovisual work from copyright eligibility. No doubt the 
entire sequence of all the sights and sounds of the game are different each 
time the game is played ... Nevertheless, many aspects of the sights and 
the sequence of their appearance remain constant during each play of the 
game. These include the appearance ... of the player's spaceship, the 
enemy craft, the ground missile bases and fuel depots, and the terrain over 
which (and beneath which) the player's ship flies, as well as the sequence 
in which the missile bases, fuel depots, and terrain appears. Also constant 
are the sounds heard whenever the player successfully destroys an enemy 
craft or installation or fails to avoid an enemy missile or laser. It is true, as 
appellants contend, that some of these sights and sounds will not be seen 
and heard during each play of the game in the event that the player's 
spaceship is destroyed before the entire course is traversed. But the images 
remain fixed, capable of being seen and heard each time a player ~ucceeds 
in keeping his spaceship aloft long enough to pennit the appearances of all 
the images and sounds of a complete play of the game ... The repetitive 
sequence of a substantial portion of the sights and sounds of the game 
qualifies for copyright protection as an audiovisual work." 
He said (at 857):

"We need not decide at what point the repeating sequence of images 
would fonn too insubstantial a portion of an entire display to warrant a 
copyright, nor the somewhat related issue of whether a sequence of images 
... might contain so little in the way of particularized fonn of expression 
as to be only an abstract idea portrayed in noncopyrightable fonn ... 
Assessing the entire effect of the game as it appears and sounds, we 
conclude that its repetitive sequence of images is copyrightable as an 
audiovisual display." 
The following year a similar question came before the Seventh Circuit of the 
United States Court of Appeals, with a similar result. The case was Midway 
Mfg Co v Artie International Inc (1983) 704 F (2d) 1009. Speaking for the 
Court, Cummings CJ observed that it was not immediately obvious that video 
games fell within the definition of "audiovisual works", the reason being that, 
each time a video game is played, a different sequence of images appears on 
the screen. But he held that the phrase "series of related images" might be 
construed to refer, not only to a set of images displayed in a fixed sequence, but 
also "to any set of images displayed as some kind of unit". He said (at 1011-
1012):

"The person playing the game can vary the order in which the stored 
images appear on the screen by moving the machine's control lever. That

20 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

makes playing a video game a little like arranging words in a dictionary A 
into sentences or paints on a palette into a painting. The question is 
whether the creative effort in playing a video game is enough like writing 
or painting to make each performance of a video game the work of the 
player and not the game's inventor. 
We think it is not. Television viewers may vary the order of images 
transmitted on the same signal but broadcast on different channels by 
pressing a button that changes the channel on their television ... Playing a B 
video game is more like changing channels on a television than it is like 
writing a novel or painting a picture. The player of a video game does not 
have control over the sequence of images that appears on the video game 
screen. He cannot create any sequence he wants out of the images stored 
on the game's circuit boards. The most he can do is choose one of the 
limited number of sequences the game allows him to choose. He is unlike 
a writer or a painter because the video game in effect writes the sentences 
and paints the painting for him; he merely chooses one of the sentences C 
stored in its memory, one of the paintings stored in its collection." 
Upon analysis, the present case seems to fall directly within the terms of the 
s 10 definition of "cinematograph film", without the necessity of resorting to 
s 24. However, that section puts the matter beyond doubt. The visual images 
that constitute the moving picture are taken to have been "embodied" in the 
computer program because the computer program was so treated in relation to 
those images as to be capable of reproducing them. 
D 
Counsel for the appellants argue it is not enough that a particular article was 
capable of producing particular sounds or visual images. If capability is the test, 
they say, every piano would have to be held a "sound recording" 
of 
Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata". Every piano is capable of producing the 
notes that constitute that work. Counsel have in mind that the term "sound 
recording" is defined by s 10 as meaning "the aggregate of the sounds 
embodied in a record" and a "record" includes any "device in which sounds 
are embodied". 
E 
I accept capability is not enough. It is important to note the requirement of 
s 24 that the article or thing "has been so treated in relation to those sounds or 
visual images" that they are capable of being reproduced from the article or 
thing. There must have been a treatment of the article or thing that is related to 
specific sounds or visual images. This can be said of a computer program, not 
of a piano. It is necessary to include a keyboard in a piano, if it is to be capable 
of reproducing the notes that constitute the "Moonlight Sonata". But the F 
inclusion of a keyboard is not something done "in relation to" those particular 
sounds; it is done in relation to piano music generally. 
I think Burchett J was correct in holding that the aggregate of the visual 
images generated by the playing of each of the two subject video games 
constituted a "cinematograph film" within the meaning of s 10 of the 
Copyright Act. 
Both appeals should be dismissed with costs.

LINDGREN J. I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment of 
Wilcox J in draft and agree with the substance of those reasons and the orders 
proposed by his Honour. I add the following observations. 
The first is historical. Prior to the commencement of the Copyright Act 1968 
(Cth) on 1 May 1969, copyright under the Copyright Act 1912 (Cth) subsisted

G

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

75 FCR 8] 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA (Lindgren J) 
21

in "works", that is to say, in original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
works, now the subject of Pt III of the Copyright Act, but not in "subject-
matter other than works", and therefore not in the sound recordings, 
cinematograph films, television broadcasts and sound broadcasts, and published 
editions of works, the subject of Pt IV of that Act. The question of copyright in 
respect of cinematograph films was treated as a question of copyright in an 
original dramatic work. Components of a cinematograph film might also have 
been the subject-matter of copyright as artistic, musical or literary works.

Under the Copyright Act, the expression "cinematograph film" is defined in 
s 10(1) (the definition appears in Wilcox 1's judgment); those acts which 
copyright in a cinematograph film gives the exclusive right to do are identified 
in s 86; and the copyright is created by s 90. Section 221 provides that 
copyright does not subsist by virtue of s 90 in a cinematograph film made 
before 1 May 1969. However, in relation to such a film, s 204(2) provides that 
a "dramatic work" includes "a cinematograph production where the 
arrangement, the acting form or the combination of incidents represented gives 
the work an original character". Otherwise, the expression "dramatic work" is 
defined in s 1 O( 1) to include a scenario or script for a cinematograph film, but 
not the actual "aggregate of visual images" constituting a cinematograph film 
as defined in the subsection. 
The advent of the computer chip exposed the inadequacy of existing 
copyright protection in relation to the new technology. There were difficulties 
in accommodating the layout of a chip's integrated circuit to the notion of an

"artistic work". There was, as well, difficulty posed by the possible 
requirement of registration of the layout as an industrial design. In the result, 
the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth) was enacted and the Copyright Act was 
amended. The substantive provisions commenced to operate on 1 October

1990.

By s 49 of, and the Schedule to, the Circuit Layouts Act, (a) the definition of 
"artistic work" in s 10(1) of the Copyright Act was amended to exclude "a 
circuit layout within the meaning of the Circuit Layouts Act", and (b) the 
Designs Act 1906 (Cth) was amended in two respects. The definition of

"article" in s 4(1) of the Designs Act was amended by the exclusion of "an 
integrated circuit, or part of an integrated circuit, within the meaning of the 
Circuit Layouts Act, or a mask used to make such a circuit"; and a new s 7 
provided that where a design applicable to an integrated circuit, or part of an 
integrated circuit or to a mask used to make such a circuit was registered under 
the Act before, in effect, I October 1990, the registration was not to be renewed 
after that date. 
Like the cinematograph film some twenty-one years earlier, now the 
computer chip gave rise to a special and exclusive regime of copyright 
protection in respect of a product. But like the copyright in the cinematograph 
film, the new form of copyright under the Circuit Layouts Act did not 
necessarily exclude copyright in antecedent works. This consideration directs 
attention to the scheme of the Circuit Layouts Act.

Under the regime in place since 1 October 1990, it is necessary to distinguish 
between three concepts: a "circuit layout", an "integrated circuit" and a

"computer program". The first concept, "circuit layout", is defined in s 5 of 
the Circuit Layouts Act to mean:

"a representation, fixed in any material form, of the three-dimensional

22 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

location of the active and passive elements and interconnections making A 
up an integrated circuit." 
A circuit layout can be conceived of as the "drawing" or the "mask", in 
accordance with which the integrated circuit of a chip is to be made. The 
Circuit Layouts Act protects only "eligible layouts". An eligible layout is an 
original circuit layout, the maker of which had, when the layout was made, a 
stipulated connection with Australia, or which was first commercially exploited 
in Australia or relevant foreign country. Section 17 of the Circuit Layouts Act B 
creates "EL rights" in eligible layouts. EL rights are the exclusive rights to 
copy the layout in a material form, to make an "integrated circuit" in 
accordance with the layout or a copy of it, and to exploit the layout 
commercially in Australia. Section 8 defines "commercial exploitation" for the 
purposes of the Act. There is commercial exploitation of a circuit layout if the 
acts of exploitation specified in the section are done, not only in respect of the 
layout or a copy of it, but also if they are done in respect of an integrated 
circuit made in accordance with the layout. 
C 
The second concept to which I referred, an . 'integrated circuit", is defined in 
s 5 of the Circuit Layouts Act to mean:

". .. a circuit, whether in a final form or an intermediate form, the 
purpose, or one of the purposes, of which it is to perform an electronic 
function, being a circuit in which the active and passive elements, and any 
of the interconnections, are integrally formed in or on a piece of 
material; " 
The third concept, a "computer program", is defined in s 10(1) of the D 
Copyright Act to mean:

"an expression, in any language, code or notation, of a set of instructions 
(whether with or without related information) intended, either directly or 
after either or both of the following: 
(a) conversion to another language, code or notation; 
(b) reproduction in a different material form; 
to cause a device having digital information processing capabilities to E 
perform a particular function;" 
A computer program or compilation of computer programs is a form of literary 
work as the definition of .• literary work" in s I D( I) of the Copyright Act makes 
clear. 
Again, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that, subject to one 
qualification not presently relevant, the subsistence of copyright in subject-
matter other than works, such as a cinematograph film, by virtue of Pt IV of the 
Copyright Act, does not affect the operation of Pt III of that Act in relation to F 
any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work from which that other subject-
matter is wholly or partly derived, and that, accordingly, "any copyright 
subsisting by virtue of [Part IV] is in addition to, and independent of, any 
copyright subsisting by virtue of Part III": s 113 of the Copyright Act. It 
follows that if the computer games the subject of the present appeals are 
cinematograph films in which copyright subsists by virtue of Pt IV, this does 
not detract from the subsistence, by virtue of Pt III, of, for example, copyright G 
in the computer programs involved. 
Section 24 of the Circuit Layouts Act is set out in the Reasons for Judgment 
of Wilcox J. A computer chip's integrated circuit will contain a copy or 
adaptation of a computer program, as defined: see s 24(2) and (3) of the Circuit 
Layouts Act and the definitions of "work", "literary work", "computer

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

75 FCR 8] 
GALAXY ELECTRONICS v SEGA (Lindgren J) 
23

program", and par (ba) of the definition of "adaptation" in s 10(1) of the 
Copyright Act. But the parallel importing provisions contained in ss 102 and

103 of the Copyright Act on which the respondents to the present appeals rely, 
apply in respect of subject-matter other than works, and are not touched by 
subs 24(2), because ss 37 and 38 of the Copyright Act, which are referred to in 
that subsection, comprise parallel importing provisions relating to works alone. 
Section 90 of the Copyright Act provides that copyright subsists in the 
cinematograph films described in the section. The definition of "cinematograph 
film" in s 10(1) of that Act which is set out in Wilcox 1's Reasons for 
Judgment, states that the copyright subsists in an "aggregate of the visual 
images embodied in an article or thing ... ". I do not think that the word

"embodied" in the definition should be understood to refer only to forms of 
embodiment known in earlier times. In this respect I agree with the following 
commentary:

"As in the case of sound recordings there has been some argument as to 
whether visual images which originate in digital form come within the 
definition of cinematograph film. But again, the critical factor is the fact 
that visual images are, directly or indirectly, capable of being shown as a 
moving picture in whatever form the initial 'embodiment' may take place. 
To assert that the definition requires that the material cannot originate in 
digital form would seem to involve an extremely literal and unnecessary 
construction." (J Lahore, Copyright and Designs, (3rd ed, 1996), (Vol 1), 
par [8040], pp 8066-8067) 
At least one form of the "argument" to which this passage refers was noted 
by the Copyright Convergence Group established by the Minister for Justice, in 
its report, "Highways to Change", made in August J 994 (at par 7.5):

"It is not clear whether the [Copyright] Act (in particular section 24) 
requires that sounds or visual images must exist prior to the treatment of 
any article or thing. Sounds or visual images may be created by means of 
writing a code and being emitted as the result of their embodiment in the 
article or thing, rather than being created and then recorded. The CCG 
[Copyright Convergence Group] is of the view that the Act should be 
clarified to ensure that such creations constitute sound recordings or films, 
and that this issue should be addressed in a further review of the Act." 
Section 24 of the Copyright Act is also set out in the Reasons for Judgment of 
Wilcox 1. I do not construe that section or any other provision of the Copyright 
Act to require that the "aggregate of visual images" exist as an aggregate of 
visual images prior to embodiment. Rather, the aggregate of visual images 
referred to is the end product which, in the present case, comprises the moving 
pictures seen as the games are played from time to time. It is true to say of 
those many possible visual images that they "are" visual images embodied in 
integrated circuits. In the alternative, the aggregate of visual images did exist 
prior to embodiment, in that, as Wilcox J has observed, "[t]hey existed in the 
minds of their creators and the drawings and models they made".

The appellants submit that the notion of "publication" poses a difficulty for 
the construction advanced by the respondents. The submission is that since 
some of the potential combinations of images may never be seen, and since 
certainly not all of the potential combinations of the images will be seen at the 
one time, a time of publication of the supposed cinematograph film cannot be 
identified or, at least, there will be numerous times of publication. The time of 
publication is an important concept of the Copyright Act since s 94 defines the

24 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1997)

period of subsistence of copyright in a cinematograph film by reference to the A 
time of its publication. Section 29(l)(b) of that Act provides that for the 
purposes of the Act, a cinematograph film is deemed to have been published:

" ... if, but only if, copies of the film have been sold, let on hire, or offered or 
exposed for sale or hire, to the public;"

The word "copy" is defined in s \0 in relation to a cinematograph film to 
mean: "... any article or thing in which the visual images or sounds 
comprising the film are embodied;" 
B 
Once it is accepted, as I think it should be, that all the potential visual images 
are embodied in an integrated circuit, it is clear that there is a single time of 
publication in respect of all of them. 
Similarly, the notion of the "making" of a cinematograph film is not 
dependent upon the generation of images which arises from a particular actual 
playing of the computer game. Section 22(4) of the Copyright Act provides:

"For the purposes of this Act: 
(a) a reference to the making of a cinematograph film shall be read C 
as a reference to the doing of the things necessary for the 
production of the first copy of the film; and 
(b) the maker of the cinematograph film is the person by whom the 
arrangements necessary for the making of the film were 
undertaken." (Emphasis added.) 
Once the special definition of a "copy" of a cinematograph film, noted 
above, is read into this provision, there is no uncertainty as to the time of the 
making, or the identity of the maker, of a film. 
D

Orders accordingly

Solicitors for the appellants: Corrs Chambers Westgarth.

Solicitors for the respondents: Kemp Strang and Chippindall.

JUSTINE BEAUMONT

E

F

G