268 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1996)

A

SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED and Another v GALAXY ELECTRONICS

PTYLTD 
SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED and Another v GOTTLIEB 
ELECTRONICS PTY LTD

General Division: Burchett J

New South Wales District Registry

8, 9 February, 28 August 1996

B

Copyright -
Video games -
Visual images shown as moving picture 
Computer generated visual images varying according to players' inputs 
within overall limit -
Whether visual images embodied in article or thing C 
-
Whether cinematograph film -
Copyright Act 1968 (Cth), ss 10(1), 24.

Words and Phrases -
Cinematographic films -
Embodied -
Copyright Act 
1968 (Cth), ss 10(1),24.

Section 10(1) of the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth) (the Act) provided: 
.. 'cinematograph film' means the aggregate of the visual images embodied in 
an article or thing so as to be capable by the use of that article or thing -
D 
(a) 
of being shown as a moving picture; or 
(b) 
of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of which 
it can be so shown, 
and includes the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a sound track 
associated with such visual images." 
Section 24 provided

"For the purposes of this Act, sounds or visual images shall be taken to have 
been embodied in an article or thing if the article or thing has been so treated E 
in relation to those sounds or visual images that those sounds or visual 
images are capable, with or without the aid of some other device, of being 
reproduced from the article or thing." 
This application concerned video games. The games were the product of 
computer-generated sequences of visual displays and aural effects, ordinarily, in 
response to players' inputs so that different game plays were generated for each 
player's responses within the overall limits of objects and scenes available to be 
generated by the controlling program. Visual images were not stored; mathematical 
F 
co-ordinates of models of objects, together with animation, and texture mapping 
data, were stored in digital form, and were used by the program to produce the 
sequential images. Integrated circuits were used. 
Determining separately the question whether the games were within the 
definition of cinematograph film in the Act, 
Held: (I) The games were within the definition of cinematograph film. (276A) 
Consideration of the object of copyright, the liberal construction of the Act, 
Parliament's intention that copyright in cinematograph film not be limited to any G 
particular technology and to include new technologies, and the necessity when 
applying the definition of cinematograph film to have regard to product, as the 
object of copyright, not the means of producing, which is not. (272E-274F) 
(2) The provisions of the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth) applied to the 
integrated circuits here used did not exclude the application of the Act to the 
games. (275B-C)

69 FCR 268] 
SEGA ENTERPRISES y GALAXY (Burchett J) 
269

A 
CASES CITED

B

C

D

E

F

G

The following cases are cited in the judgment:

Australasian Perfonning Right Association Ltd v Te!stra Corporation Ltd (1995) 60

FCR 221. 
Australian Trade Commission v Film Funding & Management Pty Ltd (1989) 24 FCR 
595. 
Autodesk Inc v Dyason (1992) 173 CLR 330. 
Ave! Pty Ltd v Wells (1991) 105 ALR 635. 
Avel Pty Ltd v Wells (1992) 36 FCR 340. 
Bach v Longman (1777) 2 Cowp 623; 98 ER 1274. 
Computer Edge Pty Ltd v Apple Computer Inc (1986) 161 CLR 171. 
Jefferys v Boosey (1854) 4 HLC 815; 10 ER 681. 
Millar v Taylor (1769) 4 Burr 2303; 98 ER 201. 
Nintendo Co Ltd v Golden China TV-Game Centre (1993) 28 IPR 313. 
Pacific Film Laboratories Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) (1970) 121 CLR 
154.

ApPLICATION

D K Cafterns QC and R J Webb, for the applicants.

J W Burnside QC and J R Baird, for the respondents.

28 August 1996

Curadv vult

BURCHETT J. Each of these proceedings raises, as a separate question, a 
problem of the meaning and possible application of the definition of

"cinematograph film" in s 10(1) of the Copyright Act 1968, as amplified by 
s 24. Are the applicants' video games, involving computer-generated images, 
cinematograph films within the definition? The answer to this question is vital 
because, if they are not, it is accepted that the applicants' cases meet an 
insuperable obstacle in Avel Pty Ltd v Wells (1992) 36 FCR 340.

There are two video games with which the cases are concerned, one entitled 
"Virtua Cop" and the other "Daytona USA". Each presents on the video 
screen a series of images resembling, more or less, a traditional movie film. In 
the case of Virtua Cop, an extremely simple but violent tale is told of assaults 
by police upon a criminal organisation. In the case of Daytona USA, what is 
involved is car racing. The parties were agreed that it is sufficient to 
concentrate upon Virtua Cop, since the two video games are constructed upon 
the same principle. In Virtua Cop, the protagonists are two police officers (with 
whom the players of the game identify) whose investigations are resisted, first, 
at a cargo wharf, next, at a construction site, and finally at their antagonists' 
evil headquarters. To begin with, there is a brief introduction, followed by the 
main part of the game in which the player must keep shooting quickly and 
accurately, with a make-believe weapon or "input" device, at the correct 
villainous targets, so that the various assaults will progress according to the 
script. At the end, there is a triumphant finale, when the police congratulate 
each other and the dastards are led away in handcuffed defeat. Only the 
successful player will reach this denouement, and only the very skilled can 
possibly do so without numerous setbacks along the way, caused by 
misdirected responses, or failures to respond, to the actions depicted on the 
screen. For example, if the player's shot misses a criminal, the player may

270 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1996)

himself be shot by the criminal; and if this happens a predetermined number of A 
times, the assault fails, and the game ends. Also, each time a criminal is merely 
winged, he may react differently, depending on where he has been hit. Thus, 
except for the opening and closing sequences, the events represented on the 
screen will show differences from screening to screening, except where the 
player's responses are all correct. 
What this means, it will be appreciated, is that the apparatus is designed to 
screen the simple story only when the correct responses to a series of cues are B 
fed into it by the player; and when incorrect responses are given, a number of 
variations will result. 
I was provided with a considerable amount of evidence concerning the 
manner in which Virtua Cop was created. Sega Enterprises Limited formed a 
team to do this. Graphic designers developed the scenes, and representations of 
the characters. In doing so, they made drawings and models, and decided, for 
instance, how a particular character would walk. Sets were made up. A "test 
version" was prepared on a computer and copied onto a videotape. Further C 
detailed sketches of scenes to be depicted on the screen were prepared by hand. 
These sketches were used as the basis for the preparation of the computer 
program, according to which particular scenes were ultimately enabled to be 
depicted on the screen. The program itself was extremely sophisticated. It 
calculated the three-dimensional position of each part of each object and 
character at each stage of all movements. An example of the sophistication 
involved is the windscreen of a car, which is shown three-dimensionally, with a D 
superimposed two-dimensional image of a reflection of the sky appearing on it. 
Sound effects, music, and very simple dialogue were also required. Over 80 
sound effects were selected from a sound library or created, and then 
manipulated, for inclusion in the program. Dialogue was recorded, and that 
recording was also manipUlated and included in the program. Music was added 
after composition on a synthesiser. 
When all the work had been completed and was brought together, it was 
represented by a highly specialised piece of computer equipment, suitable, and E 
suitable only, for bringing Virtua Cop to the screen. Although, as I have said, 
sketches, models and videotape were used in the course of the creation of the 
program, in the finished product, the screen images were not represented by 
anything comparable to the tiny translucent images which characterise the 
original technology of cinematograph film. A closer analogy could be drawn to 
videotape, containing magnetic fields that may be transformed into visual 
images upon a screen. But the respondents argue that even this analogy misses F 
the mark. According to their contention, Virtua Cop is not represented in any 
form until it is born on the screen out of the union between the player's input 
and the computer program that calculates the three-dimensional reference 
points, not images, by reference to which the images themselves are made to 
appear on the screen. The respondents say that the visual images were not 
stored in any manner; mathematical co-ordinates of models of objects, together 
with animation and texture mapping data, were stored in digital form, and are 
used by the controlling program to create images on the screen. In doing so, the G 
respondents say, the "microcomputer controls the sequence of visual displays 
and aural effects in response to a player's actions and this generates a different 
game play for each player within the overall limitations of objects and scenes 
available to be generated by the controlling program". Thus, they contend,

"the visual imagery ... is an artefact of real-time computer graphics in that the

A

B

c

D

E

F

G

69 FeR 268] 
SEGA ENTERPRISES v GALAXY (Burchett 1) 
271

images on the screen are synthesised on the fly by the controlling program". 
On this basis, their argument asserts it is "not correct to say that the 2-
dimensional screen images themselves are stored in the computer like some 
form of 'digital movie' and simply played back during the game".

While disputing the ultimate conclusion, the expert called for the applicants 
conceded the technical accuracy of these propositions, in so far as they describe 
the nature of the processes performed by the computer. But I think it should not 
be overlooked that there is a significant concession involved in the proposition 
that the influence of the player's actions is confined within "the overalI 
limitations of objects and scenes available to be generated by the controlling 
program". What this must mean is that stored within the computer is the 
capacity to produce, and the limitation to producing only, the co-ordinates and 
other effects necessary to constitute upon the screen a particular limited number 
of variants upon the basic theme. Of course, if a player, to use the technical 
jargon, responds at all times with the correct "inputs", only the one version of 
the story will appear upon the screen. 
The provisions of the Copyright Act with which this case is centraIly 
concerned are the definition of "cinematograph film" in s 10(1), and the 
amplification of that definition which is to be found in s 24. Section 10(1) 
provides:

"In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears -

'cinematograph film' means the aggregate of the visual images embodied 
in an article or thing so as to be capable by the use of that article or 
thing -
(a) of being shown as a moving picture; or 
(b) of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of 
which it can be so shown, 
and includes the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a sound-track 
associated with such visual images." 
Section 24 provides:

"For the purposes of this Act, sounds or visual images shalI be taken to 
have been embodied in an article or thing if the article or thing has been so 
treated in relation to those sounds or visual images that those sounds or 
visual images are capable, with or without the aid of some other device, of 
being reproduced from the article or thing." 
The expert evidence adduced by the respondents appeared to seize upon the 
expression "the visual images embodied in an article or thing". Plainly 
enough, what is seen by the viewer is shown as a moving picture; but the point 
made was

"that there does not exist inside the computer anywhere a 2-dimensional 
image [of what appears on the screen]. That 2-dimensional image is 
simply computed from looking at alI the three-dimensional vertices of the 
polygon model [this is a reference to the way in which the computer 
apprehends objects] and doing what is a clever arithmetic on it". 
The validity of this argument must depend on how the word "embodied" is 
understood. This word, as is made clear by The New Shorter Oxford English 
Dictionary (1993), generally refers to the giving of "a material or discernible 
form to (an abstract principle, concept, etc)". The precise sense conveyed by it, 
as a matter of English idiom, appears in the lines W S Gilbert put into the 
mouth of the Lord Chancellor in Iolanthe:

272 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS

"The Law is the true embodiment 
Of everything that's excellent. 
It has no kind of fault or flaw, 
And I, my Lords, embody the Law."

[(1996)

A

The Lord Chancellor is claiming that the Law contains and reflects all 
excellence, and that he himself holds (and therefore will pronounce) the Law. 
Excellence may be a somewhat indefinite abstraction, but the law involves 
precise rules, and Gilbert, who had practised briefly at the bar, was perhaps B 
thinking of the Latin expression "in gremio iudicis". The word "embodied" 
may well have been taken, by the draftsman of s 10, from a usage in copyright 
law that closely paralleled that of Gilbert's Lord Chancellor. In Jefferys v 
Boosey (1854) 4 HLC 815; 10 ER 681 (a case so important in this area that it 
was described by Windeyer J in Pacific Film Laboratories Pty Ltd v 
Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) (1970) 121 CLR 154 at 166 as "[t]he great 
case"), Lord Cranworth LC said (at 955; 736):

"So long as a literary work remains unpublished at all, it has no existence, C 
except in the mind of its author, or in the papers in which he, for his own 
convenience, may have embodied it." 
When Lord Cranworth used the word "embodied" in that way, I think he was 
speaking of an author giving his creation a form in which it could be held for 
continued existence and use. In my opinion, that is the essence of the meaning 
also intended to be conveyed by the Report on Computer Software Protection 
(1995) of the Copyright Law Review Committee, chaired by Sheppard J, at D 
par 10.142, where the Committee referred to the importation of an integrated 
circuit in order "to import a copyright work embodied in that integrated 
circuit" (emphasis added). The same meaning, I think, is to be found in s 10. 
To narrow the sense of the word so as to confine an embodiment of a visual 
image to something in the nature of a frame, of which the image on the screen 
is a reflection, would be to introduce a limiting concept not inherent in the 
language. The phonetic symbols on paper to which Lord Cranworth alluded did E 
not directly reflect words. Sumerian cuneiform or Egyptian hieroglyphics 
would have come closer to doing so. But, in reality, writing is a code which the 
brain interprets, just as the computer in the present case interprets coded co-
ordinates and input data which it "reads" as visual images on the screen. 
A novel or poem will generally be conveyed by the medium of writing; and a 
film by some means of showing its visual images upon a screen. But in neither 
case should the medium, through some narrow interpretation, be permitted to 
obscure an understanding of the subject matter of copyright. As regards literary F 
copyright, its true nature was stated by Lord Mansfield in Millar v Taylor 
(1769) 4 Burr 2303 at 2396; 98 ER 201 at 251, when he said:

"I use the word 'copy,' in the technical sense in which that name or term 
has been used for ages, to signify an incorporeal right to the sole printing 
and publishing of somewhat intellectual, communicated by letters.

The property in the copy ... is equally an incorporeal right to print a set G 
of intellectual ideas or modes of thinking, communicated in a set of words 
and sentences and modes of expression. It is equally detached from the 
manuscript, or any other physical existence whatsoever." 
He went on to describe copyright as "a property in notion" which "has no 
corporeal tangible substance". Lord Mansfield's proposition is restated in

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

69 FeR 268) 
SEGA ENTERPRISES v GALAXY (Burchett J) 
273

H Laddie, P Prescott and M Vitoria, The Modem Law of Copyright and 
Designs (2nd ed, 1995), par 2.36:

"It should be borne in mind that although it does no harm to refer to an 
author's manuscript as his 'work' in everyday speech, it is far otherwise 
when precision of thought is required. The 'work' is the product of his 
mind; the manuscript or other record is merely the medium whereby the 
precise nature of that mental product may be discovered." 
See also the classic American work by E S Drone, Treatise on the Law of 
Property in Intellectual Productions (1879), p 6. Similarly, in the case of a 
film, "the copyright subsists in the collage of visual images and sounds which 
together constitute the film": per Gummow J in Australian Trade Commission 
v Film Funding & Management Pty Ltd (1989) 24 FCR 595 at 610. 
The law of copyright, as Windeyer J declared in Pacific Film Laboratories 
Pty Ltd (at 166), "is entirely the creature of statute". In the construction of the 
various Acts since the statute of Queen Anne (8 Anne c 21) entitled "An Act 
for the Encouragement of Learning by vesting the Copies of printed Books in 
the Authors or Purchasors [sic] of such Copies during the Times therein 
mentioned", the courts have for more than two centuries taken a broad view. In 
Bach v Longman (1777) 2 Cowp 623; 98 ER 1274, which concerned the 
pirating of two sonatas by J C Bach, Lord Mansfield said (at 624; 1274-1275):

"The words of the Act of Parliament are very large: 'books and other 
writings.' It is not confined to language or letters. Music is a science; it 
may be written; and the mode of conveying the ideas, is by signs and 
marks ... If the narrow interpretation contended for in the argument were 
to hold, it would equally apply to algebra, mathematics, arithmetic, 
hieroglyphics. All these are conveyed by signs and figures. There is no 
colour for saying that music is not within the Act." 
This was rightly called by Drone, at p 140, a "liberal" interpretation. The same 
approach to construction is reflected in two recent High Court cases. In 
Computer Edge Pty Ltd v Apple Computer Inc (1986) 161 CLR 171 at 187-188, 
Gibbs CJ said:

"However although it would be no doubt right to give the Copyright Act a 
liberal interpretation, it would not be justifiable to depart altogether from 
its language and principles in an attempt to protect the products of 
scientific and technological developments which were not contemplated, 
or only incompletely understood, when the statute was enacted." 
In Autodesk Inc v Dyason (1992) 173 CLR 330 at 335, Mason CJ, Brennan 
and Deane 11, explaining their rejection of a particular argument, said (at 335):

"That narrow literal construction would, however, partly frustrate the 
obvious legislative intent to confer real protection upon the actual set of 
instructions regardless of whether they be actually expressed in written 
form or merely embedded or stored in a non-sensate form such as 
electrical impulses on a disk, ROM or EPROM." 
Similarly, in his dissenting judgment in Australasian Performing Right 
Association Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd (1995) 60 FCR 221 at 236, 
Sheppard J said:

"While I am quite prepared to give the Act a beneficial construction so 
that it will embrace cases arising because of new technology when its 
language is tolerably clear, I do not think it right to take this course unless 
one can be satisfied that the right which is said to exist is one which 
reasonably arises from the language which parliament has used."

274 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1996)

In the case of copyright in a film, the legislative history shows plainly that A 
Parliament did intend to take a broad view, and not to tie the copyright to any 
particular technology. The often cited Gregory Report of 1952, presented to the 
Parliament of the United Kingdom, attests this. By par 93, attention was drawn 
to developments in recording technology. The committee commented:

"Further, it can no longer be assumed that the reproduction of visual 
effects must be preceded by photographs, and we are given to understand 
that even now it is possible to record on a magnetic tape a spectacle which B 
can be reproduced visually as a television program. Accordingly, in 
drafting provisions relating to records, cinematograph films and such 
matters, we consider that the wording adopted should have regard to the 
end-product (eg sound or visual representation) rather than to the means 
whereby these effects are produced." 
Similarly, in Australia, the second reading speech of the Attorney-General, 
Mr N H Bowen QC (as he then was), in relation to the Copyright Bill 1968 
includes the following (House of Representatives, Hansard (1968), p 1534): 
C 
"For many purposes, ordinary cinematograph film and videotape are 
interchangeable. Thus a scene may be recorded by a television camera on 
videotape and the videotape later copied on to [an] ordinary cinemato-
graph film. The incidents recorded may be seen either by viewing the 
videotape on a television screen or by viewing the cinematograph film on 
a cinema screen. The Bill therefore assimilates videotape to ordinary 
cinematograph film for the purposes of copyright protection and the term D 
'cinematograph film' appearing in the Bill is defined as including 
videotape.' , 
Legislative amendments in England, too, have been designed to ensure that 
videotape is covered: Copinger and Skone James on Copyright (13th ed, 1991), 
par 2-30. Against the background of previous legislation, of technological 
developments, and of the Gregory Report, it seems to me that the definition of

"cinematograph film", expressed as it is in terms of the result achieved rather 
than of the means employed, points very strongly to an intention to cover new E 
technologies which do actually achieve the same result. This view is, of course, 
strengthened by the terms of s 24. That section was plainly inserted to ensure 
that the word "embodied" did not receive a narrow construction. It applies 
quite literally in the present case. With the aid of "some other device", 
namely, the input device utilised by the player of the video game, the apparatus 
is capable of reproducing quite precisely the aggregate of the visual images 
created by Sega Enterprises Limited so that they are shown as a moving F 
picture. To demonstrate this, it is sufficient, of course, to refer to the visual 
images created to be shown upon the reception by the apparatus of the

"correct" inputs. In any case, as I have already pointed out, the variations are 
within predetermined limits, and they would not have any effect upon my 
conclusion. 
An important additional matter of context, bearing on the construction of the 
definition of "cinematograph film", is the definition in s JO( 1) of "copy". For 
this, "in relation to a cinematograph film, means any article or thing in which G 
the visual images or sounds comprising the film are embodied". It cannot have 
been intended that the word "embodied" should, in this definition, have a 
meaning which would allow computer technology, of the kind employed in the 
present case, to be utilised to mimic with impunity, for example, a new 
animated film of the "Mickey Mouse" variety. Dr Lambert, a suitably

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

69 FeR 268] 
SEGA ENTERPRISES v GALAXY (Burchett J) 
275

qualified expert called on behalf of the applicants, gave evidence that some 
existing movies could be reproduced by object based encoding, and I can see 
no reason to doubt the feasibility of this being done, now or at least at some 
time in the expanding future of the technology. An "infringing copy" of a 
cinematograph film, as defined in s 10(1), must be "a copy of the film". It 
would be strange indeed if Parliament intended the definition of "copy" to be 
construed so narrowly that a representation of an animated film, which looked 
just like the film, would not constitute an infringement, simply because it was 
produced by the computer technology involved in the present case. 
But the respondents refer to the provisions of the Copyright Act and of the 
Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth) which were in question in Avel Pty Ltd v Wells 
(1991) 105 ALR 635; and on appeal, (1992) 36 FCR 340, to argue that the 
integrated circuits involved in this case must find their protection, if at all, in 
those provisions. I do not accept this argument. The fact that there are here 
integrated circuits, and that these give rise to the application of particular 
statutory provisions, does not subtract from the further, and relevant, fact that 
the use of the integrated circuits is capable of bringing to the screen, so as to be 
shown as a moving picture, the aggregate of visual images making up Virtua 
Cop. That attracts the operation of the provisions of the Copyright Act in 
respect of cinematograph films. 
Then the respondents return to the proposition that a cinematograph film 
must utilise frames, as, of course, the original moving pictures produced by 
photographic processes did. But it seems to me that this involves the fallacy of 
confusing the means with the ends. A cinematograph film is "shown as a 
moving picture". That is how it appears to the viewer. But the means by which 
the effect is produced are not the effect, and it may be accepted that the frames 
involved in the original technology may not be essential to the production of 
the effect by other technologies, such as computer graphics. The argument is as 
if, in construing a building contract, we were to say that pouring concrete could 
not refer to pumping it through a pipe because pouring it is doing so bucket by 
bucket. It was once. And moving pictures were once achieved only frame by 
frame; but now or in the future the motion may pour across the video screen in 
pixels. 
Although the Acts in force in the United Kingdom and South Africa today 
differ from the Australian legislation, it is interesting to note that loynson-Hicks 
on UK Copyright Law (1989), par 1.49 states:

"As with sound recordings, neither the medium from which the moving 
image may be produced, nor the means of producing the image is relevant. 
For that reason again, computer programs and in particular many computer 
games, could be protected as films, as well as in their own right.' ,

And the Supreme Court of South Africa has held in Nintendo Co Ltd v Golden 
China TV-Game Centre (1993) 28 IPR 313 that a computer generated video 
game is, within the meaning of the South African legislation, a cinematograph 
film. 
Against the event that I should take a different view, the applicants relied, in 
the alternative, on the proposition that the equipment included a sound 
recording. However, s 23 provides that "sounds embodied in a sound-track 
associated with visual images forming part of cinematograph film shall be 
deemed not to be a sound recording". Accordingly, this proposition is a true 
alternative, and cannot stand with a finding that the sound track belongs to a

276 
FEDERAL COURT REPORTS 
[(1996)

cinematograph film. In the circumstances, it is unnecessary to consider the A 
point further. 
I have concluded that the applicants are entitled to succeed on the separate 
question, but the only order I make at this stage is to direct them to bring in, on 
a date to be fixed, short minutes of appropriate orders. The respondents must 
bear the costs.

Orders accordingly

Solicitors for the applicant: Kemp Strang & Chippindall.

Solicitors for the respondents: Corrs Chambers Westgarth.

RODEN PRITCHARD

B

C

D

E

F

G