LAWS3702 Corporate Law Lecture 6 Directors, Officers and Directors’ Duties 1 1

1. Directors and other officers
2. Decision-making by the board
3. The duty of care, skill and diligence

Today’s Lecture 2 Directors & other officers 3 Who is a company officer? Was Mr King an officer of parent company? Who is a company director? 6 • Consenting adults who are not disqualified or (for some) current or recent auditory (inc Aust resident/s): ss201A-D, 324CI • Methods of appointment discussed in L4 Option #1 By appointment 1. Retirement at end of their term 2. Resignation: s203A (RR), s203AA and s203AB 3. Removal by members: ss203C-E 4. Disqualification: s206B-F How do people stop being appointed as directors? 8 1. Automatic disqualification: s206B For bankruptcy, certain convictions & disqualification abroad 2. Court-ordered disqualification: s206C-EAB For breach of civil penalty provisions, multiple corporate failures, repeated breaches of the CA, breaches of some other acts, unpaid employee entitlements 3. Disqualification by ASIC: s206F For multiple corporate failures but easier for ASIC to prove (rebuttal of ‘show cause notice’) • Potential length of disqualification varies depending on mode of disqualification • Purpose of disqualification is to protect the public • Relevant factors for actual disqualification calculations set out in ASIC v GetSwift • Applications for leave to manage s206G; relevant factors in Re Westgate Ports More about disqualification De facto directors • Not validly appointed • But act in the position of director • Includes those not properly appointed and ‘outright usurpers’ (Grantham 2022) • Principles in Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL (No 2) Option #2: By acting as a director Shadow directors • Not validly appointed • But the formal directors are accustomed to acting in accordance with their wishes • Principles in Buzzle Computers • Can be another company! Standard Chartered Bank v Antico Option #3: By calling the shots with the de jure directors • In some circumstances, it is possible for the one person to be both a shadow director and a de facto director. • It is not necessary that the instructions or wishes of the shadow director be given over the whole areas of corporate activity for which the directors are responsible. • A person is not a shadow director merely because they impose conditions on their commercial dealings with the company with which the directors feel obliged to comply. • There must be a causal connection between the instruction or the wish of the shadow director and the directors acting on it. It is not sufficient if the act that was specified in the instruction is something that the directors would do irrespective of the instruction. • The directors collectively must be accustomed to act on the shadow director’s instructions or wishes and it is sufficient if a ‘governing majority’ of the board is so accustomed to act. Buzzle Operations v Apple (per White J, aff’d on appeal) Shadow directors – principles • Natural people +18 years ordinarily resident in Australia: s204A • Optional for pty companies and mandatory for public companies • Functions
- Record-keeping (core function)
- Special obligations under the CA
- Precise scope of the office differs between companies
• No longer ‘mere servants’ but officers (s9) Who is a company secretary? 13 Directors’ duties in overview 1 4 Statutory duties
• Always owned by ‘directors’ as defined in s9
• Most also apply to ‘officers’ as defined in s9 (but not s191 or s588G)
• Two statutory duties imposed on employees (s182 and s183)
• Breach may arise through involvement in someone else’s contravention, as well as attempts

General law duties are owed by fiduciaries As a rule, to the company as a separate legal entity: Percival v Wright Exceptionally, duties may be owed to individual shareholders (particular reliance on information and advice): Brunninghausen v Glavanics Who owes and to whom? 16 • The company as the ‘proper plaintiff’ for general law duties - Compensation or damages - Board’s power to decides whether to enforce the duties - Liquidator’s power during a winding-up • ASIC enforces statutory duties and can seek civil penalties - disqualification order - pecuniary penalty order - compensation order • … and criminal penalties for some dishonest breaches Who enforces the duties and how? 17 The Duty of Care 1 8 180 Care and diligence—civil obligation only Care and diligence—directors and other officers (1) A director or other officer of a corporation must exercise their powers and discharge their duties with the degree of care and diligence that a reasonable person would exercise if they:

(a) were a director or officer of a corporation in the corporation’s circumstances; and

(b) occupied the office held by, and had the same responsibilities within the
corporation as, the director or officer. Note: This subsection is a civil penalty provision (see section 1317E). • As well as the director’s employment contract (if they have one) and the common law • The standard of conduct is the same in each of the sources. What are its sources? 19 • By determining how the director behaved and comparing that behaviour with the care, skill & diligence that:  A reasonable person would use  If they were a director/officer  Of a company in that company’s circumstances  And in the director/officer’s office & with their responsibilities • A director or other officer breaches this duty if he or she is ‘negligent’ • Negligence is more than reasonable risk taking or mere mistakes: United Petroleum v HSF • The foreseeable harm(s) must unreasonably outweigh the potential gains How the court determines breach 20 No, per the old cases: Re City Equitable Fire Insurance, Re Cardiff Savings Bank (Marquis of Bute’s Case). Yes, per the 'modern' cases since Daniels v AWA Ltd. It set up an objective test. Now, all directors must be in a position to guide and monitor the company by: • Obtaining a basic understanding of the co’s business and its fundamentals • Keeping informed the activities of the company on an ongoing basis • Monitoring the co’s activities including by attending board meetings regularly • Monitoring the co’s financial position by reviewing financial statements Is there a minimum standard of care? 21 • Care is that of a reasonable person in the same circumstances • Skill will depend upon whether - the position required special skills: Vines v ASIC (CFO) - the director is an executive or non-executive - or had special qualifications: South Australia v Marcus Clark • Diligence is that of a reasonable person in the same circumstances The three parts of the statutory duty 22 ASIC v Rich (Austin J): Consider –
• The type of company (eg is it listed?)
• The size and nature of its business
• The terms of its constitution
• The composition of the board
• The distribution of work and responsibility between execs and board
• Whether or not the company is controlled by a parent company

What are the relevant circumstances? 23 ASIC v Rich: factual arrangements within the company, not just legal duties, incl: • Specific tasks delegated to the director • Way in which work is distributed within the company • The particular director’s experience and skills What are the relevant responsibilities? 24 Part of the equitable duty but not mentioned in s 180; per ASIC v Vines, the skill requirement is implicit The standard of skill depends upon whether the director is an executive or non-executive director, and whether the person has special qualifications Directors with special skills are held to the standard of a person professing to have those skills: Gold Ribbon (Accountants) P/L v Sheers Executive directors’ greater involvement in the business of the company leads to an expectation of greater knowledge, focus, and awareness. What about skill? 25 Chair of the Board – ASIC v Rich Audit Committee – ASIC v Healey General Counsel – Shafron v ASIC Common specific board roles 26 There is not (yet) enough uniformity among non-executive roles for them to be a ‘type’ of board position with set professional expectations. But that may evolve – some people are professional NEDs, after all. ‘The law has not yet established the extent to which the position of a non-executive director shapes the content of the duty of care.’ ASIC v Macdonald (No 11) Meantime, NEDs must meet the minimum standard of care and apply any special expertise they have to the benefit of the company. What about NEDs? 27 The degree of diligence required of a director will vary according to the circumstances of the director’s appointment But all directors must exercise the amount of diligence that would allow them to be familiar with the operations of the company’s business and keep informed about the financial status of the company. Sheahan v Verco (2001) 19 ACLC 814 The ‘silent partner’? Diligence 28 • What boards may delegate and to whom? - Certain functions to committees: s 198D - Day-to-day management to the CEO / managing director: s 198C (RR) - Any power to a director, employee or someone else: s 198D • The delegate must follow directions, but the delegate’s actions are treated as the directors’ actions: s 198D(2) and (3). • The directors remain responsible for the acts of their delegates unless the conditions in s190 are met • Conditions concern beliefs re: compliance & competence/reliability When is delegation allowed (and an excuse)? 29 When is a director NOT responsible for delegate? Section 190 30 • ASIC v Ryan (2024) as an example of successful reliance on reliance! What about reliance on information or advice? Section 189 31 • Exception to liability • Requirements of s180(2) CA 2001 1. Good faith and a proper purpose 2. No material personal interest in the decision 3. Informed themselves about the subject matter of the judgment to the extent he/she reasonably believed appropriate 4. Rational belief that the decision is in the best interests of the company (a presumption of rationality applies) • Director must prove the elements of the defense are met (onus) • Examples: ASIC v Mariner Corp Ltd (2015); Pacific Current Group v Fitzpatrick et al (2025), [1246] et seq What about business judgements? 32 In some recent cases, directors have been held liable for a breach of s180 for allowing their company to contravene the law: eg ASIC v Flugge (foreign bribes) Breach of the law by the company is a ‘stepping stone’ to imposing liability of directors (without high standard of proof in individual enforcement proceedings for the underlying contravention): ASIC v Fortescue Metals What are the risks of this approach? Caution has been expressed in ASIC v Mariner Corp Ltd and ASIC v Cassimatis (No 8) (no general individual obligation to ensure compliance – facts are key) BUT it’s probably here to stay and may get broader: ASIC v Wilson ref ASIC v Cassimatis (proof of corporate contravention vs ‘extreme likelihood of breach) Veil piercing by other means? 33 ASIC v Adler 34 ASIC v Macdonald [No 11] & ASIC v Hellicar 35
