SPEAKER 0
I Oh Some I OK team, I Can you hear

SPEAKER 1
me on this?

SPEAKER 0
It Alright, well that's certainly working.

SPEAKER 1
OK, everyone, we'll make a start. Hello and welcome to Corporate Law. I'm, I'm glad you found this room. I ended up wandering all over this tiny little building for about 5 minutes before I finally realised it was here, so congratulations on making the first, uh, you know, successful move in this course this semester, getting to the lecture. So before we start, um, just a couple of housekeeping matters, and the textbook subscription, which I mentioned was in progress, has now been completed, so if you haven't been able to uh source a copy of the textbook of your own, um, and you're planning on using the library copy, you can now do so online. Um, in addition, in next week's lecture, which will be a guest lecture by my colleague, Professor Ro Ross Grantham, there will be a 20 to 30 minute Q&A about the interactive oral assessment, which will be conducted by myself and um the learning designer and the Bell faculty, John Rattai, who's been helping me, um, set that up. So I highly encourage you to, Either attend that, um, if you're planning on asking questions yourself, or if you're not going to be able to be there, then send me a message ahead of time with a question you'd like us to address. And if you can't get there, obviously there's always uh email and um. Listening to the lecture afterwards, but obviously, it's better for you if you can get your questions answered right there and then on the spot, or at least a week before, a week odd before the assignment will be released. Um, now, what's this? Oh yes, tutorials start in week 3, which you should know already from the learning guide and the uh ECP. So what are we talking about when we talk about companies? Who's had something to do with companies, or if we can frame it a bit more generally, when I say company, what comes to mind for you? Bit of free association here, there's no wrong answer. Big Big businesses, OK, so one thing that comes to mind when we think of companies is big business. And we'll talk about why that is actually in the later part of this lecture. What else? Small businesses, well on exactly the same slide, we'll talk about why small businesses are so important, and that will also be a factor, the, the split between small and large businesses in the corporate landscape that you'll see driving the range of corporate corporate regulations we talk about today. What else? Big and small, yes. Employees, so, uh, companies are important employers in this country, and as we'll talk about later in the lecture, employment law is not formally part of what we could call corporate law, but it's nonetheless a very close relation. What else? Yes. Shares and dividends, so an interesting fact about companies, which we'll touch upon in the first part of the lecture, is that they can issue shares in themselves as a way of raising capital. So companies, as we'll talk about, are a type of legal person, as are natural people, all of us. But we cannot, as it were, uh, issue a category of security in ourselves and sell that to others, and they in turn cannot take that thing and sell it to other people. So there are no shares in humans, thankfully, that are assets, items of value. What else? Yes. Exchange of goods and services, yes, so for a very important reason that we will touch on today and get more into in week 3, or lecture 3. Companies are very important vehicles for commerce. And they have been crucial in driving the consumer expansion that we've seen since industrialization. Part of that has to do with their almost unique ability to control risk for investors. Those shareholders that we talked about a moment ago, and the other people who derive value from, generating profit from things. And maybe you can think about what that characteristic is. What else? Yes. Company car, yeah, so a really interesting thing about companies is that they can, like other legal people, own items in their own name. One of the challenges, of course, is ensuring that those items are used to serve the purposes of that enterprise. And that's something that we'll touch upon when we talk about director's duties, and in some cases, employees' duties in later weeks. What else? Yes. Public and private companies, so there are differences between different there are or what we could, Call kind of typologies of companies, there are ways of thinking about the corporate landscape, and one division is between public and private companies. And that's something that we're going to talk about in today's lecture. What else, we've had generally kind of pro-corporate um statements about the company. Any new leftists in the room? No-one wants to out themselves, closest radicals, sociology students, you're all welcome. Yes. OK, what, so I said, um, socialism, and you say corporate tax rate, what's the connection between those two things? Oh yes, the states So the uh the state collects the revenue that private enterprise produces. Private enterprise is predominantly channelled through the corporate form. And the corporate tax rate is lower than the individual, or at least the um marginal individual tax rate. So private entrepreneurs are in that sense given a tax break. Is there something else we could drill into when we're talking about? Politics and the corporation. Yes. Yes, they come into it in a kind of couple of different ways. The the response was anti-monopoly laws, and back in the, you know, back in the day, in the, sort of before we had companies as we know them now, there were enterprises that were given government monopolies in order to um, In order to exploit certain resources, so monopolies and the corporate form go way back. Today, the attitude is, um I guess less mercantilist and more liberal or neo-liberal, namely that we shouldn't allow monopolies and corporations are a a target of um consumer competition and consumer laws. Insofar as they try to circumvent those anti-monopoly laws. And make more money from the goods and services that they're selling. Well, let's come back to that question at the end of the lecture, and we'll see if we can see any more, um, political economic connections between, The, um, what we're talking about and um. The, well, any political and economic connections of the company. So let's get into the actual material, and what we're focusing on in today's lecture. So through that brief schematic discussion about, The company, what does it mean to you? We have already touched upon many of the issues that we'll be dealing with over the next few weeks. What are the characteristics of the company? Why are those why are those characteristics important? What sort of companies are there? How do you ensure that the power that ends up flowing through companies is exercised for the proper, um for the right reasons? What role, uh, what are the roles of the various people within companies? How do companies relate to the society at large? In today's lecture though, we're talking about what a company is and why it matters. We're talking about what company law is and why that matters too. So in some sense this lecture skirts over the, the entire course, but it focuses on the issues that will, um, it sort of sets up for the issues that we'll mainly be talking about in the first few weeks. So as we already mentioned, there are different types of legal person. A company is a legal entity, but it is only one of many. The main contrast in this kind of tree of legal people is between juristic or artificial and natural people. And I, I don't really need to explain that to you, except to say that one of the challenges in studying company law is understanding or getting our heads around the fact that a company is a person. And it can do things that natural people can do and some things that they can't do. But it has no physical form. So sometimes when I teach this class, I bring a box in. To illustrate the both present and absent nature of a company. But today, and given that we've got a nice small lecture theatre, what I'm probably going to do is get you to imagine that this lectern is a company. It's there, but it's not there. It's there by virtue of the law saying that it exists as a person. So, in this family of juristic people, we have corporations of lots of or several different types. Corporations sole like the monarch, and corporations aggregate, like the university. These are entities that legally stay the same as the people within them change, so the, the thing, the legal person, is like a a box or a unit for holding assets and liabilities. The people within it can circulate. There's a different uh monarch every few decades. There's a different vice-chancellor, there are different students. Every couple of years, but the institution of the monarchy, the monarch in particular continues, the institution of the university does as well. If we're interested, we can also note that some environmental um, That's cool, I don't know what we call them, artefacts have been recognised as having legal personality. And that's not just an interesting point, it underlines one of the the key takeaways from this lesson and this slide. That a company is a type of juristic entity, it exists because the law, Formal law, in this case, says that it exists. So Once upon a time there were no companies, because there was no law to enable registration. In the way that um we have it today. Equally, so it's possible, it was possible for a legislator to say, Here is a company, it's going to exist through this piece of legislation, ergo it's possible for a legislator to say, that object, that chair over there is a legal person. That river, that tree is a legal person. So there's some sense of arbitrariness of choice in the fact that we have corporations, companies, as legal people. So what is a company? Well, there is no definition per se in the Corporations Act, which is the leading piece of legislation in company law in Australia. But we can define a company as per the slide as an artificial legal person created by law to hold assets and carry on a business or other activities separate from participants in that business or activity. So in economic terms, a company is a type of business structure. It's one way of organising people and assets. That's made available within this legal system. As opposed to others, there are others. In uh legal terms, it's a body corporate. So if we go back to the previous slide, a company is a type of body corporate. In economic terms, it's a type of business entity. When we look at this slide here, what's the difference between a corporation aggregate and a company? The answer is more or less that a company is created through the process of registration. That exists in the Corporations Act. There are lots of different types of companies, uh sorry, corporations, corporations sole, corporations aggregate, and a company is a type of corporation that's created under the Corporations Act. So we could actually put a little line coming out of the corporation and split it between corporation and other on this slide and have the company as a type of corporation. But this is what I inherited from Ross a few years ago and he puts them as separate, maybe I'll take it up with him. So what is this process of registration? Registration is the process whereby, Companies come into being. It's described in Section 117 of the Corporations Act. And it's now done through an online process. Basically, well, actually let me ask you, has anyone here been involved in registering a company before? Yes. And how did it work?

SPEAKER 0
Uh, filled out form. notify As Exactly, and were you any in any doubt

SPEAKER 1
that you were going to receive confirmation that it had been processed, your application had been approved? No, OK, so, we've heard from our colleague that registration is through a process that's administered by ASIC and ASIC has the final say so on whether the company is the application is approved or not. There may be separate processes of notifying other regulators of the existence of this um company, but that depends on the type of business it carries out. So what's important in that statement is two things. One is that the process is, well, maybe to build on what we've already said, the process is statutorily prescribed. Once upon a time there was a form that was, or there is a form, Form 201, that's in the Corporations Act regulations. That's now been transformed into an online form, but basically what you have is a mandated set of information that has to be collected about the people who are going to be involved in this company and how it's affairs are going to be structured, at least in basic terms. That information is then given to this public body, ASIC, which is the corporate watchdog and registrar. ASIC then looks through that information and if all is in order, it issues a certificate of registration. Now, that in itself, that process, the government recognising or approving an application from someone who wants to establish a a body corporate of some sort, is not new, it goes back hundreds of years. But what is relatively new about this is that it occurs, not as of right, but through a much more simplified process. It's available to the public. And it's only in, I guess, rather exceptional cases that the regulator ASIC would refuse an application. So once upon a time, the privilege of incorporation was only available to very few people. Now it is much more widely available, both because the form can be filled out by pretty much anyone, it's not that complicated, and because the hurdles are fewer. It's publicised, the Company Law, the Companies Act, and the acts that followed them, publicised the power to incorporate. So once that um certificate is registered, the company comes into existence. Of course, as a practical matter, and it's a kind of funny side note, um, company names are an issue. Obviously you don't want to include a choose a company name that like is like someone else's company name, or else you might get accused of ripping off their IP. But in addition, there are some company names that are off limits, like uh names such as Sir Donald Bradman. So, um, cricket fans, don't get too excited and, uh, try to name your company after Sir Don, it's statutorily off limits. Right, so. Pre-registration activities. Before a company is registered, it maybe that the people behind it want to conclude agreements on its behalf. Now, how long did it take you to get your company registered? Or are you not you the whoever you were working for, it doesn't matter, you don't have to disclose that. How long did it take? OK, so, today, the process of um applying for a registration of a company and getting the certificate of registration is quite quick. I've heard even it can be done in a couple of days. But back in the day, it was something that took a long period of time. And that meant that you could have situations where a person would see the need for a company. New company, a business activity that they wanted to pursue, an opportunity. And they judged that doing that activity through the company, through a company, was the most commercially desirable option for them. But there would be then delays for when the company was actually between the time they saw that opportunity and the time that the company, their application was approved. So they developed in the law a set of rules for dealing with pre-registration activities, and these basically balance out the need to ensure that people can, who are promoting companies, company promoters, a bit of terminology there. Can seize the day and do something with their opportunities, using the benefit of the corporation. To do that work before the company is set up, but at the same time, not allowing people to just randomly, um, do things on the company's behalf and then uh not actually set the company up and avoid the obligations that the those agreements entail. So what do the rules look like? On the one hand, or the first thing to say is that company promoters have fiduciary duties to the company. They're probably going to be the people who are directors of the company, but not necessarily. Directors of companies have fiduciary duties towards companies because they are in a position of power and control. Promoters of the company are likewise in a position of power and control, perhaps even more so because they get to decide how the shares will be structured, which internal governance it's going to use, which rules it's going to use. with fewer checks and balances. So In terms of these pre-registration contracts, and this is the 2nd thing to say. It should be the fact that the, the, they are not binding on the company because the company has no existence before it's recognised or created through that process of registration. But to allow for some pre-registration activities and facilitate commerce, the law says that it's possible that companies are bound by contracts that are entered into for their benefit, which they ratify either expressly or implicitly after their their uh registration. That ratification must also be within a reasonable time or a time chosen by the parties. If the company is not registered or doesn't ratify the contract, then the promoters are liable. Likewise, if the company doesn't perform the contract after registration. After ratification. And the authority there is Section 131. Now before we go on, does anyone have any questions? No questions, you shall we continue or shall we take a break? Who says continue? OK, everyone, let's push on. So, I said earlier that in legal terms, a company is um a type of corporation, it's a type of juristic entity. And in business terms, it's a type of um business entity. And in that kind of business ecology, there are other types of um business vehicle or structure that, Entrepreneurs can use. What we do in the next um slide over and over the next few minutes is compare these structures so that you get a sense of when it would be useful or advisable to recommend that someone use a company or establish one for yourself if you're going in that direction, or when it would be better to use another type of structure. And you'll see that there are uh are a kind of some cross-cutting trade-offs involving compliance costs and risk. So a sole trader, as it says on the slide, is a person who is not registered as a company, but who carries on a business. A sole trader does not have the benefit of limited liability. What that is we'll talk about in a minute. But basically it entails that they are personally liable for all the debts of the business. So there is no legal separation between themselves and the business. Ergo, the business, If it were a company in the form of a company, cannot hold debts, cannot hold assets separately from the from that person. When that person is doing business, there's no-one else in the room. That's a sole trader, one person doing business by themselves without the benefit of working through a company. Some clubs and societies can also be unincorporated. So you can have groups of people, well actually let me step back from from that. It's also possible for people to carry on a business. In conjunction with others, right, like that's just common sense, we don't just do things by ourselves, we cooperate with other people. Sometimes those um acts of cooperation are for profit, sometimes they're not for profit. When the actions are not for profit, we could call that group of people working together a club or society. So the Poodle Protection League, the um, Futsal Association of Saint Lucia, the, I don't know what, you know. Rock Collecting Guild of Taringa, these could all be unincorporated associations, group of groups of people working together with some sort of broadly pro-social aim and not importantly, aiming to make a profit from their activities. When people just get together to collect rocks, protect poodles, or play futsal. And organise activities around that. They don't benefit from Any sort of legal protection as a group of people. There's no legal entity that's separating them from the rights and the liabilities that that business, that activity may entail. They may, however, say to themselves, well look, you know, it's all very well to want to protect poodles or um promote futsal in Saint Lucia, but that activity entails risk. So I or we decide that we would like to incorporate. That is to create a corporation to hold the assets and the liabilities of that enterprise, that activity, separately from us as the people who are doing the activity. And for that non-profit purpose, we have the um Association and Corporation Act. In Queensland of 1981, and there are equivalents in other states. So if any of you are involved in the UQLS or JITLL or um one of those other, um, student societies in the law school, you may well be benefiting from incorporation under, The Associations and Corporations Act because you are doing things on behalf of that. Enterprise, but you're not going to be, you know, don't want to give out legal advice here, but, um, the starting point would be that you are doing those activities through the society and therefore, You were doing that what you do is attributed to the society, and the risks and liabilities that you generate are not borne individually by you. Your assets are not on the line if you screw up on the society's behalf, in other words. OK, now that was um we were talking about people working together for an enterprise to do some something in common. And we firstly talked about non-profit projects. And we said that um, Clubs and associations are, let's say the starting point is they're unincorporated, but it is possible for them to incorporate. Via a different, uh, legislation piece of legislation than is available to register a company, which is the Corporations Act at the Commonwealth level. What's another type of um business vehicle for people who are working together? Presumptively, not through a corporation of any sort. But for profit. And I'll give you a hint that some of you may aspire to be one of the people who's part of one of these things one day, yes. A partnership, exactly, so a partnership is, Two or more people carrying on a business in common with a view to profit. That is the definition of in section 5 of the Partnerships Act. So partnerships are unincorporated groups of people that are carrying on a for profit activity in common, so they're sharing the profits and the losses of the business and they are, Able to bind each other, they are agents for each other. And they are importantly or personally individually liable for debts of the business. Now, can anyone see the see the pattern enough so far to be able to explain to me, Why individual partners are personally liable for business debts. Generated by the partnership activities. Even by one of the other partners, they're agents for each other, so you have, you guys could be partners in a business down the front, you could, one of you could do something that the other person doesn't authorise and yet, Uh, the other person would be liable for those actions. Why would that be the case? What's missing, that means that those, Individual participants in the business are liable for the business debts and not the business itself. There's been no creation of a business. 100% correct. What's missing is the corporation. So there is no imaginary fictional entity in the room with our colleagues. Which could hold the rights and obligations that their activities, Together, generate. There's no veil of incorporation hanging between them and the business that they are carrying on. So, it follows that they are individually liable. For the business debts. And they also individually own a share in the business's assets. So A partnership is an unincorporated business vehicle, presumptively, but having said that, and because there's almost always an exception to the rule, it is possible to incorporate partnerships now in Australia. You might come across in your readings something called a limited liability partnership. They exist, I believe, under state legislation, and they come into being when you have At least one of two types of partners. A limited partner who is not involved in the business, and a general partner who is involved in the business, and their liability is not limited. So you have in a limited partnership, you have two partners, one who's actively involved in management and in the business, and they are, their liability is not limited. So their individual assets are still on the line for business debts. And then you have a unlimited partner who's like your silent partner. They're not actively involved and they're protected from the business's debts. Through limitation on liability at law. There are two disadvantages, you might say, well, OK, why don't law firms conduct their business through limited partnerships, and there are 2 answers there. One is, well, maybe 31, Only the limited partner, Has a limitation on their liability, so the people who are involved in the management of the business are still personally liable, as for a general partnership. Second The uh limited liability partner loses their liability protection if they start getting involved in management. So there might be grey areas about when someone is really a silent partner and when they're not. And third, they are taxed, uh, they don't have the benefit of the company tax rate, to come back to what we talked about in our little free association game at the start. So really the calculation would be, why would you go to the trouble of having a limited liability partner if only one type of partner can have their liability limited, and they may lose that, and meantime, none of the people involved have the benefit of uh the company tax rate. So that's a general comparison between a limited partnership and a normal partnership, and a limited partnership and the corporate form in the sense of a company. Alright, now another term that you may come across if you haven't done so already is a JV or joint venture. A joint venture is sometimes hard to distinguish from a general partnership because again, it involves two or more people carrying on a business together. The difference is at law that they're not doing that business in common. So they're not acting as agents of each other for each other. Sharing, business, losses and profits. In a pool. Rather, you have, um, presumptively separate entities, of course, coming together and maintaining their, Um Separateness and individualness. And working together through a contractual arrangement. So there's no sense in which, well, we're both dentists, we need to share, um, space, we respect each other as colleagues and, um, I trust you to go out and do things on my behalf, you trust me to do the same, and we both profit from building up a common brand and sharing the costs of operating the practise. It's more an idea like, I'm a programmer. I'm a graphic designer, you do this bit, I do this bit. We launch a we launch the app and we split the profits fifty-fifty. But of course, as you can see from um sort of a little bit of stumbling in my explanation, there can be a bit of a grey zone between a joint venture and a partnership, and there are disputes between parties where one says we're a partnership and the other says no we're not, we're a joint venture. Last point is 1 or 2 points. Keep in the back of your mind the concept of a trust that you learnt about in earlier courses. We don't talk about it much in um in this course, it's, it's not a focus, but it is important to remember that a trust, the idea of the separation of beneficial and legal ownership was a sort of conceptual precursor to the company. And today, one way that people manage their um their liabilities is often by combining a corporate and trust form, so you can have corporate trustees and that can be, they're often used for family businesses as a way of further protecting the assets of the family from the business, the liabilities of the business. How are we doing on time? OK, last point of distinction in this sort of universe of business entities is between a company and a managed investment scheme. Has anyone come across the phrase managed investment scheme or MIS? Anyone doing finance here? Anyone working for a super fund on the side? Alright, well managed investment schemes are not companies, they're not incorporated, but they are a way of um managing assets for a collection of people that is um administered through the Corporations Act or regulated by the Corporations Act. To give you something of a potted definition, a managed investment scheme is a variety of arrangements comprising entities, um, either corporations or unincorporate unincorporated business vehicle that meet the definition in Section 9 of the Corps Act. That definition basically breaks down along several functions. So, in a managed investment scheme, you have members contributing money in exchange for a share, so that sounds a bit like a company. The contributions are pooled, so the money they contribute is contribute is put into a big pot. And then it is reinvested in other activities to make a profit. The people who make those investments, so the shareholders in the investment scheme, are not involved and not entitled to control the day to day activities of the scheme. So they basically provide money and hope that the people who use it will invest it wisely, and that investment will generate a dividend for them. But they don't have any day to day control rights. So managed investment schemes involve a I guess you could call it in some ways a similar risk profile to companies because, well, does someone wanna tell me, why do you think there's a similar risk profile to the company from the perspective of the society at large. It's a little bit similar to the trustee. Example, you have one person who's entrusted with other people's money, or one group of people who are entrusted with other people's money. And in contrast to your classic trustee situation where it's a relatively small group of people, you have a lot of people potentially contributing. Small amounts or large amounts of money and still a relatively small group of people who are in control of those funds, so the law steps in to control the risk or the temptation for those people in control to engage in self-dealing or just slacking off and not doing their job because they're not going to lose out if they if they don't administer those funds well. So we have some, we have, in short, a variety of different options that an entrepreneur or a person who's wanting to carry out some kind of activity in the world could choose from, and the choice between them is determined by. The relative costs and what they're doing and the relative costs and benefits of those specific structures. So the relative, the idea of relative costs and benefits obviously involves a comparison. So what are we comparing to? Here we're comparing these structures to the company. Now, recap or a quick kind of alertness check, tell me again, what is a company? Or give me a word. We can put the words together. One begins with R. Registration, OK. Another one begins with C. CO Cooperation. Another one has the word act. It's not a word, it's a phrase. Corporations. Act and process. A company is a corporation that's created through the process of registration provided for under the Corporations Act. It is a legal person. Albeit an artificial or juristic person. Because the Corporations Act is a, An act of law. So That's what a company is. How does it compare and contrast to those other sorts of business structures? Well, first, There is limited liability, who wants to tell me what limited liability involves? Yes. Correct. The legal definition of limited liability is that the um members are um not liable or only liable to the extent that they haven't paid for their shares. Members are only liable for the business debts to the extent that they haven't paid for their shares. Now, without at the risk of bombarding you with detail, I'll just tell you, I'll unpack that a little bit for you so it's clearer what that means. It's possible to um buy shares partly paid. Partly paid, um, you, a partly paid share is a share for which you pay some of it upfront, some of the share price upfront, and the rest of the share price at a later date. So there's an amount, the company has an amount on its books for when it has um unpaid shares called it's unpaid share capital. And if you were an owner of one of those unpaid shares, and the company you own that share in, Goes belly up, as in becomes insolvent, you are liable to pay the amount that you haven't yet paid for those shares. But do you have to pay anything else towards its debts? Yes or no? No, your liability stops there. Most company shares are fully paid. So for most shareholders, most of the time, Limited liability means no liability. But the law calls it limited liability because there is actually something called a no liability company, which we'll talk about a little later on. So one big advantage of the company, compared to a partnership, an unincorporated association or a sole trader, is that it offers limited and, Well, those are the main points of contrast that are important for us in this course, is that it offers the business people, Specifically the shareholders and the directors of that company, limited liability. Another one is perpetual succession. Perpetual succession is a fancy word for the um process or effects that I described earlier when talking about the monarch and the University of Queensland. It is the phrase that's used to imply that the entity stays the same as the participants in that activity, its activities change. That's perpetual succession. In company law terms, a company continues until it is deregistered. It exists from the point of registration and it continues until it is deregistered. Even if its original shareholders are no longer involved. At some point in its life course, even if its directors change. So what does that matter for entrepreneurs? Yes. So That's it, so it's easier to transfer a business because you can transfer the assets and liabilities that are part of making a business work to the company. The company becomes the owner of those things, and then you sell the shares in that company. Because the company stays the, the corporate form, the company stays the same as the owners and managers change, the new owner comes in as the shareholder, but the corporate structure continues. Contrast that to a partnership or a sole trader. In a partnership, every time um if you want to sell the business, basically you have to transfer all the assets from the individual partners to the new partners or the new person or people who are buying the business. And that's more complicated and it's higher risk for the person who's taking ownership of the business. So in some senses, incorporating and doing business through a corporation can increase the value of the business because it means it's easier to sell. It becomes a more liquid asset. So that point is connected to transferability of ownership. So what that means is that in a company, the shareholders do not own the assets of the business. Who owns them? The company owns them. What the investors own are shares, and shares are basically a personal right against the company to participate in the profits that that company may generate, as well as um a smaller number of rights to participate in the governance of that business. Smaller compared to what the directors have. So These shares. Are, um, in this business whose identity doesn't change. Because of that, it becomes easier to trade those shares. They can become something that's like a fungible asset, a little bit like money. They're a unitized and familiar form of investment in something. And over the years they've developed um secondary markets in shares, so basically places where you can go and sell shares that you've already bought from a company or bought from a previous shareholder to other people. So they have value, it's easier to sell, there's a, a kind of recognised asset class for shares. And that's also important for growing the business. Um, or for transferring the business and encouraging people to invest. And it means also that for a company you can sell more shares in it. And if people agree with you that the profits are going to increase over time, they will give you money and you'll be able to put that into your investment and make money, more money out of it for everyone. At least that's the logic. There's also a number of investor issue, so in a partnership, the number of partners is capped at 20. For a public company, there is no limit on the number of shareholders. For a proprietary company, getting back to our public-private distinction that we mentioned at the start, there is a cap, 50 non-employee shareholders. But even if a proprietary company grows so much that it wants to exceed that cap, It can change form, still is, it's still a company, but it just changes into a public company. So that's an advantage for entrepreneurs if they think, look, I'm going to need more investors than 20 people. Then makes sense to Could make sense to go through a company, of course they could also borrow the money or retain earnings, they might be able to get in other ways, but if they think that they want, 20 people to stump up capital, not as lenders but as investors, then, The partnership is not a way for them to go. The question then becomes whether they should use a public or a private company. Now it also follows from what we've talked about that the company is a separate legal entity can uh enter into contracts by itself, can also be sued in its own name. So it's possible for people working together to have a separate entity, separate in the sense that a separate entity with the benefit of limited liability. That can hold assets. And also enter into agreements with other people, incur new liabilities for the good of that enterprise. And that's a slightly different set of, that's a different arrangement than for a partnership. In a partnership, each person is an agent for the other person, but the entity itself, the or the business vehicle itself cannot incur business obligations. Partnership is simply a set of relationships, it's not an entity in its own right. Furthermore, and two points, one of which we've already touched on, and then we'll take a break. The company has um or operates through a default set of internal governance rules, or at least it can. So the Corporations Act provides something or includes something called um replaceable rules, which are a set of rules that govern the internal workings of companies that don't replace them. Some of them are mandatory for some types of companies, but we won't talk about that for several weeks. The important thing to know is that you can Have relatively little knowledge of business vehicles or um, Kind of administrative processes within organisations, fill out that ASIC form, and not include a constitution, because you don't know what one is, or you don't know what should go in there. And the Corporations Act will then provide a set of rules that say what is a meeting what's a quorum for a meeting of um, shareholders? How is power divided between shareholders and directors, and so on and so forth. Which again lowers the cost of operating through a company vis a vis, Other um types of, Business vehicle OK, the partnership has its default rules as well, the Partnership Act, so maybe that's not like a clear advantage of a company. But It's something that means the company is attractive because you can use the default rules, or if you have anything specific in mind, you can also replace them by designing your own company constitution. Within limits that we'll talk about in a couple of weeks. And last but not least, the company has a 25 to 30% tax rate, and depending on how much income people, the, the people behind it earn from other sources, they may end up earning, um, it may be more tax effective for them to earn this new income through this new enterprise. Through a company than just adding it to their pool of assets and bumping them up, a tax bracket or having it taxed at a higher bracket if they're already in one. All right. So why would people want another business structure? Because a company involves more compliance costs. Obviously, it's, there's a compliance cost involved in registering the company. You have to know how to fill out the form. If you can't figure it out between yourself and Chat GPT I guess, you've got to pay a lawyer or an accountant to help you fill it out. And there are some pros you know, procedures involved, you've got to get written consent from people, it's a legal process, so it involves formality. Because it involves a reduction of risk on the part of the entrepreneurs, the investors, and the managers of the company. The law also places more supervision around the operation of a company. So there are some small exceptions, or some small, some in some ways quite important exceptions to the limited liability principle. So limited liability is not absolute, especially when it comes to um insolvent trading, as we'll talk about in later weeks. And in addition to that, the person who operates a company as a director has a whole lot of duties placed on them. Their information is also in the public realm. Who they're working with and how, so more information, they have less privacy than people who are just carrying on business as a as a partnership or as sole traders. They may be liable for enforcement actions. ASIC is not just the registrar, but also the watchdog of companies under the Corporations Act. And if you breach your director's duties or do other nefarious things with respect to the company, it's possible that ASIC may come after you. So putting all these things together, uh an entrepreneur will be weighing up the benefits from operating through a company, as a juristic entity. With certain characteristics in company law and other business vehicles. In particular for the types of scenarios we're talking about a partnership or a sole trader. And with that endeth the first part of the lesson, we'll take a 5 minute break and then we'll come back to talk about how we can classify companies and um, A little bit about the nature and history of company law. So we'll be here at 7:01. Yeah So just I I I know.

SPEAKER 0
I I Speaker.

SPEAKER 1
OK team, we're gonna make a start. So if you ever find yourself in the position of working in a commercial law context and needing to advise on how someone should structure an enterprise, one of the things that you'll need to know is the difference between different types of companies. So far you've learnt the difference between companies and other types of business entities. Now we need to dive into the differences between companies so that you can make those kinds of important comparisons. So companies can be uh typologized in a couple of different ways. First is by nature to by reference to how they manage member liability. The second is their status as public or private companies, and the 3rd and 4th are for their size, and that's relevant only to private or in other words, proprietary companies, and for public companies, how they manage their, um, or the availability of their shares. So let me put it the other way, the last point is the, Um, listing their capacity to list or not, whether they're listed or unlisted. So, just to recap, status, public or private, that's one difference. 2 Member liability, so member exposure to company debts. 3, for private companies, size, large or small, for public companies where their securities can be sold on a public exchange like the ASX or over the counter, unlisted. So what about member liability? In some ways this is, I guess, the most kind of headline. Uh, classification or part of that typology. I said at the start that one of the major advantages of the company is that it creates a separate legal form that can hold the liabilities of the business, and that then allows for limited liability, which is that rule that the members are only liable for the business debts to the extent um that they haven't paid for their shares. So it's the limitation on liability, limiting by share, is the most common form of commercial enterprise and the most appropriate to most businesses. The definition of a company or mem having membership or liability limited by share is provided for in section 9, and it says, as I've said before, a company formed on the principle of having liabilities of members limited to amount, it's a company formed on the principle of having the liability of its members limited to an amount, if any, unpaid on shares. So that's a limitation. Of liability for shareholders. And I've already said what a sharer is. It's a right against the company to for certain things, participation in profits, if any, and some decision making on some governance matters. We can contrast that to a company uh that limits member liability by guarantees. We all know what a guarantee is by now, don't we? A guarantee is a promise to pay someone else's debts, if they don't do so. So you might have very generous parents who promise to pay your um mortgage if you don't. Not recommending that as a parent, but um something that some parents do. It's also possible to become a member of a company on the basis that you promise to pay a share of the company's debts, but only, A certain amount. Some companies are established on the basis that the members don't get shares, they don't get a right to participate in profits and decide those governance matters, they get a right to pay, Only a small amount towards its debts. And participate in those governance matters. Now What do you think would be better for a company that has a profit-making goal? Being limited by shares or being limited by guarantee. Yes. B gu Does a guarantee give you a right to participate in the profits? Are you sorry, are you From the from the perspective of the investor. Shares, yes, because limited liability limits your liability anyway, right? So you don't need to say, well, you don't need a guaran a guarantee with a clear liquidated sum to limit your liability, that's the function of limited liability. But a guarantee isn't a right to participate in profits. It's only a promise to pay a small amount towards any debts. So a a company limited by guarantee is generally a form that's used by non-profit activities or people who are carrying out non-profit um enterprises like charities. In addition to that main distinction between companies that are limited by shares, and companies that are limited by guarantee, we have some companies which are, And Have No liability associated. With their securities or their shares. So these are only companies uh that are in the mining industry, and they basically entail that there's no statutory obligation to pay even an unpaid amount on the shares. So if you buy shares in one of these no liability companies, you may buy those shares partly paid. Meaning that you promise to pay, say, $5 of a $10 share price, you pay $5 today, and you promise to pay the remaining $5 in 2 weeks. If the company is a no liability company, and it goes, becomes insolvent at the end of week one. Do you have to pay the remaining $5? No. Cos remember, limited liability officially means that you're only required to pay whatever you haven't paid towards your shares. But you do have to pay that. For a no liability company, there's no residual obligation to pay what you haven't paid for your shares. Contrast that to an unlimited company which have no um have no limits on the member's liability to contribute to the company debts, and every year I mean to research, why would such companies exist, who would use them, why not just operate through a partnership? Is your idea so bad or so good? I I don't know, but I, I was going to ask AI yesterday but I forgot, so that can be a research task for you. Why would people set up a, a um unlimited company? In most cases, people want the benefit of limited liability, cos they want to know that they can invest money in this entity, in this enterprise, participate in the profits, but not be liable for the losses it generates. So Next point of comparison, first one was how the company limits member liability, if at all. Second is between public companies and private companies. Now we're not going to get too caught up in the language public and private, because today there are private companies which are very large and in that way very public in scare quotes. But I guess historically, what it meant was that you had some companies that were ah had securities that could be sold to the public at large, and other companies that were used by people who were in closer relations to each other. And it still is the case today that public companies are not able to do anything that involves issuing a disclosure document under Chapter 60. That's basically selling securities to the public. And they have more, uh, As a consequence, more compliance and disclosure requirements around them than do private companies whose securities are typically held by a smaller number of people and are not being sold to those who are less likely to have information about their operations that's reliable. So this is a busy slide. And it wouldn't really be a good use of our time, I think, if I went through and talked you through every single cell. I think I can leave you to read it through together with your textbook and the Corporations Act. But I do want to just hone in on the general vibe that it's going to or should convey to you. And that is that public companies have more opportunities or more options for capital raising. Does everyone know what capital is? Das Capital. The Stuff, the assets, the blood that is used to fund. Operations. And in turn, hopefully get turned into profits. So it can come in the form of debt capital, money you borrow, or assets that you borrow. It can come in the form of, And profits that you reinvest. It can also come in the form of, Share capital. That's the capital you get from selling an opportunity to participate in your profits going forward. So, public companies can sell their securities. It's possible, don't wanna confuse you, but it's possible for companies, not just to chop up their their shares of themselves, their right to their profits, put a portion of them out and flog those off, but also to um, Raise money by selling rights to interest from people, rights to er promises to pay interest to people in exchange for those people, giving them small amounts on loan. We call those debentures. The basic point is, public companies can sell that stuff. To the public at large. Private companies cannot. So The trade-off is public companies are subject to more compliance obligations. There's, they have less flexibility in terms of their, in terms of their internal governance, and they have more reporting requirements. There's an intermediary category for large proprietary companies, they have some of the same reporting requirements as public companies, But it's not exactly the same. So let's now talk about the difference between public and private companies, or sorry, between large and small proprietary companies. So if we go back to that. Little diagram there. Proprietary companies can be divided depending on whether they are or distinguished on the basis of size and, The definition, the relevant definition is found in Section 45A of the Corporations Act, read with the Corporations Regulation cited on the slide. So it says that if a company satisfies at least 2 of the following tests, it will be classified as large. Or vis a vis if it, um, yeah, if it's classified as large, so if it has more than, 25, um, it's consolidated gross operating revenue for the financial year, Um, for itself and any entities it controls, which is an important category in itself. If it's more than 25 million, you know, that's been up to 50 million in the regs, then it's large on that test. If its assets are valued at more than 2.5, 12.5 million, up to 25 million in the regs, then it's large on that test. If it has more than 50 employees, which was up to 100 employees in the regs a couple of years ago, then it's large on that test. If it's large on two tests or more, then it is a large proprietary company, and that matters for its reporting requirements as set out in section 292 of the Corporations Act. Does that make sense? So proprietary companies can be distinguished based on their size, and the definition of size, or the one that matters, it's not just, you know, do we think it's a big company or not, it's actually set out in the law, there's a legal definition. And we get that legal definition from Section 45A, but we get the numbers from the regulations, because the numbers in the Corps Act were increased by regulation a few years ago. And you might like to think about why, what could be the political motivation for increasing the. Those levels are more corporations going to be captured, more proprietary companies going to be captured by those increased? Um, those increased reporting requirements or fewer with higher thresholds. Fewer So when the government, I think it was the Morrison government, increased the thresholds for large companies, effectively they were deciding that fewer proprietary companies would have increased reporting obligations. So within the category of public companies, those are companies that can sell their shares to the public at large, we have listed and unlisted companies. Listed companies are companies, Uh, that have been chosen to join the official list in this country of the ASX. And has one or more of its securities quoted for public trading on the ASX. So the ASX is a public marketplace for shares. It's a public marketplace for shares. The ASX operates to operates an online computerised trading marketplace. The advantage of having one's shares listed on the ASX are, one, that it makes you look big and important because as we'll see, there are um some pretty stringent requirements for getting listed with the ASX. And 2, that it potentially allows you to raise more capital. And Have your securities increase more in value over time. So it's good for capital raising because basically you have more people who are potentially interested in buying your shares. So the bigger marketplace means you're likely to have more people who are interested in making your type of investment. And because of that, Your securities may end up being worth more because there are more people who can compete for your securities. So listing can be lucrative to the um company, as a way of enabling it to raise more capital. By selling its securities to more through that opportunity to sell their securities, market their securities to more people, and also to the existing investors in that company, who might see their, the value of their investment rise through competition for their shares. It also can mean that though that um well it will generally mean that there's a dilution in control, because there's a larger number of people who become invested in the company who are unknown to the original. progenitors of the company, the promoters or the directors or the existing shareholders. It means heavier regulation, because a company that, whose securities that can be sold to the public at large is going to be an important company for the government to watch, or the regulator to watch. Because if something goes wrong, then more members of the public will be affected. And as a consequence of that, or as a reflection of that, the ASX is not just a provider of a marketplace. It also has watchdog functions under the Corporations Act. It has a duty to cooperate with ASIC in conducting, In an investigation and has a duty also to report suspected breaches of its listing rules to ASIC. So although it's actually itself a private company, it has a quasi-regulatory role. Now what do you do to get listed? Well, listing is only an option for public companies, but it's not an option for all of them. You need to firstly satisfy requirements around size, so these are summarised on the slide here. There's a minimum number of investors and a minimum number of a minimum value of the shares that they hold. Your constitution has to comply with the ASX listing rules, so there's some governments governance requirements there. You need to prepare a um disclosure document, typically a prospectus that um, details or provides details about you as the company and the things that you're doing and the securities you're offering. You need to also pass a um financial test, which is either a profit test or an asset test, the details of which are set out on the screen. In addition to all of that, you have to go through the process of listing with the ASX. That involves an application, preparing your disclosure document, lodging it with ASIC, and then applying to the ASX. In a form that shows that you've satisfied the listing requirements. Now, that's typically done with an IPO, an initial public offering, so you have to go through all the hurdles uh involved with, um, Uh, preparing a disclosure document as well, so simply going through the process is going to involve considerable expense, lots of lawyers and accountants, fees. And in addition to that, there's a $25,000 odd fee that gets paid to the ASX itself. So listing is not a right. It's only an option for public companies, but it's not a right for all public companies. So which companies are more important in Australia? We talked about the large, small distinction. This slide is it kind of breaks up our um hard law studies for a moment, but it's an important one I think in understanding the uh what could we call them? The sort of twists and turns of corporations Law. Corporations law is captured in the the just in the Corporations Act is hugely complex. And part of that complexity is a function of the exceptions and the different routes that it provides. Now, it does that because effectively corporations law is governing two really different type of players. On the one hand, your big end of town, which um provide the most tax, so, um, according to these statistics, and by my research, they were the most recent ones, um. Based on company income, only 0.1% were very large companies, but they paid almost 2/3, so 62.5% of the tax. So from the perspective of the government doing its capital raising business as we discussed earlier on, the um big end of town, large companies and very large companies are the very large companies are the most important. But they make up a small fraction of the companies that exist on ASIC's books at any one point in time. Most companies are, um, at the very, excuse me, at the very best they're microbusinesses. So company law has to accommodate all of those types of businesses, and at the end of the semester, you can make a call on how well you think it does that. But be kind. And put its achievements or not in perspective. And the perspective that you might like to put it in is um one of time and function. So in terms of function, Company law can be defined as those uh sets of rules that govern the relationships within um between people in and around the company. So it establishes the relationships within the company and the um rights and obligations of people with with certain roles. As well as relationships between the company as an entity and other legal entities out there. Both individuals and corporates. So company law, therefore allows companies to come into being, it regulates their existence and also their termination. It gives characteristics to those entities, limited liability, corporate capacity. And so on. It also talks about or it also regulates the liability of companies or within that subset of characteristics, it regulates the liability of the company as an entity vis a vis outsiders. And in terms of insider relationships, it allows companies to Issue securities, be those debentures, those small parcels of debt, that are then sold off and allow the company to profit, um, By taking the loan or by investing the proceeds of the loan. And also securities, those rights to participate in profits if they're made. So that rules on corporate finance are an important part of company law. And Another um important part in in kind of coming back to our discussion around um directors is directors' duties and the obligations of people in positions of control in the company. So we can say that company law is that um subspecies of law that deals with the corporate uh the nature of a company, its formation and termination, it's attributes, duties and rela and relationships around it, and how it raises money. That's not to say it's the most important source of rules for companies, as we said, industrial relations is key, competition rules are, but it is the sort of foundational law for a company. So in terms of what a ah what company law comprises, the most important piece of legislation in this space is the Corporations Act. It's, um, you know, it's a whopper, I think. Justice Kirby commented on its size, like 20 years ago, and at that point it was um 2500 odd pages and nearly 1500 sections. I dare say it's longer today. It's complemented by the Corporation's regulations which do some of the things that we've already talked about in providing detail, like increasing the values for the large, small proprietary company tests and setting out the forms. So those are two sort of core instruments, statutory instruments in this place, in this space. Terms in those instruments are then interpreted through case law in the ways that you guys already know, and issues that are not covered by the Corporations Act, it's not a code, are also regulated by um cases. So as we'll talk about when we talk about director's duties, director's duties are um there are director and officer duties in the Corporations Act, but they don't replace the rules at common law. So in addition, there are common law fiduciary duties on directors as well. Same thing goes for the rules on sta on corporate contracting. The ASIC Act is also important because it sets out the powers of the regulator, the corporate watchdog. Um, as are the accounting standards which provide the, uh, an important transparency tool for companies. If companies are, companies are in some sense a set of accounts. How do you tell that a company is in the room while you look at its accounts. So the accounting standards are um important because companies are required to keep financial records and some companies are required to prepare financial reports and have them audited and in so doing, they have to comply with the accounting standards. Last but not least, if a company is a public company and if that public company is listed, then the ASX listing rules will bind them. As part of that contract between the ASX and that company for listing, but also other people, and a kind of exception to the privity rule, other people are able to um sue on, Breaches of the ASX listing rules. If they have had their interests affected, and you'll see that exception to the brevity rule in section 793C of the Corporations Act. The ASX, that makes the ASX listing rules enforceable by ASIC and persons aggrieved about violations of their rules, of the, of those rules. So where do we get company law? I said, you know, you can make a judgement about what you think about company law based on its functions. Does it enable people to um go into business, provide for limited liability properly, um, does it regulate finance well enough, you could, you could make that assessment in that way. But you could also make the assessment by looking at how it does that, given how it's evolved. Because although corporations, um, we didn't have companies before we had something called the Companies Act, which then became the Corporations Act in Australia. There were historical antecedents to the company, so when, once upon a time, those, you know, pre-Downton Abbey, um, style parliamentarians in London came up, you know, past the original Companies Act, they weren't doing that in a vacuum. They were doing that with the backdrop of certain events and certain legal concepts. It's important therefore to have a bit of an idea about what those events and concepts were. So hold your breath everyone, we're about to make a quick 3 to 5 minute detour into the history of company law. OK, so once upon a time in the Middle Ages, there were corporations sole and corporations aggregate. We know what those are already, right? Corporations sole were people like the King and the Queen, riding around on their horses, and also the Archbishop of Canterbury. OK, so we know where this is all taking place. And in addition to that, there were corporate aggregates. So corporation sole referring to an entity. Institution that stays the same as the individuals change, but just one person. King, Queen or King I think was the only corporation sole or the Queen if that was the monarch at the time, Archbishop of Canterbury, not sure who else, but those are, I think 2 will do for today. And corporations aggregate, so entity stays the same as owners and managers change. But long before the the Corporations Act, we're talking Middle Ages. They are things like municipalities, universities, the church. So, we can see why it would be important for those institutions to have a personality separate from their ever-changing participants. Also trade guilds, if we go back to monopolies and the relationship between them and company law. I told you it goes back a while. So over time, um, people kind of cottoned on to the idea that, oh, it's awfully nice to have this thing called an, an entity, well, they don't call it an entity, a corporation that can be like a body that can hold rights and liabilities, separate from, um, people, the people who are operating them, and can take contributions from others. So they developed a practise of the monarch accepting petitions to um form a corporation. So if everyone heard of Queen Elizabeth? Right, the original 10, you shook your head, don't be cheeky, yep. I, when I think of Queen Elizabeth the First, I think of what's her name, that Australian actor. Um, your parents would remember this movie. Uh It's terrible, that's old age, but she had long blonde hair and she played in the movie Elizabeth. Right. And one of the things that she, you know, she's famous as the virgin Queen, Queen Elizabeth, but it's quite likely that she had a relationship with this guy that then went out and exploited in big square quotes, the other parts of the world. Namely was involved in imperialism, early colonialism. And how did he and others do that? Well, they got a right from the Queen to go out and um conduct those enterprises, those exploitative enterprises. The Queen and the others who invested in it got a share of the profits. And they were the only ones who were allowed to do it, so it was a, a monopoly, coming back to what we were talking about before. So there were some things called early charter corporations, corporations that were established by asking the Queen or some people later in high positions of office. In the executive to be given the right to form a corporation that would accept contributions from other people and go out and do something that was, um, requiring of a large contribution of capital, so expensive and risky. So these became popular and over time they kind of changed form. They were things like, you know, if we forget Queen Elizabeth and we move on a couple of 100 years, maybe just, I don't know, no-one quote me on the, the number of hundreds, we get the British East India Company, and companies like that. These early sort of quasi-public colonial enterprises. And entities like the East India Company and Hudson Bay Company are joint stock companies in which people invest a sum of money and participate in the profits. But they're not companies in our sense of entities that are created through this relatively public process of incorporation. They're only created through um a process of asking someone in a high position of power to give you that privilege. Nonetheless, there were enough of these companies at some point in the 18th century that there was a vibrant secondary market in their shares. What's a secondary market? For the arts students in the room, and full disclosure, I'm a graduate um of an arts programme at this university. It is a market whereby people sell shares that they've bought from the company or someone else has bought from the company. So company sells share to initial investor, initial investor sells share to another person, that person sells the share to another person and so on. That's called a secondary market. The primary market is between the company and the shareholder, the secondary market is between people who are trading in those securities. So that process of trading led to speculation. People investing just because they thought that they could get more for their share. At the time they sold it than when they got it, not because they thought over the long term the company would generate a profit that would make it a good investment. And that speculation eventually led to a bubble, so a massive inflation in the price that wasn't supported by the underlying value of the assets. And that bubble burst. And when it burst, there were a lot of people in a kind of emerging middle-class, if we want to call it that, who were left out to dry. And why does their class status matter, going back to the issue of politics? Because they were emerging as a category of people who had political power, who the people in office who were deciding what the law should be needed to pay attention to. So parliament responded by passing a law called the Bubble Act, which outlawed companies. You couldn't incorporate. You couldn't do something that involve selling shares. And the Bubble Act remained in place until the mid-nineteenth century. Why it was changed, why it was replaced by the Companies Act, which allowed for this process of incorporation by, um, polite request by an ordinary person, if you want to put it like that, was that over time, people began to try to get the benefits of the corporate form in other ways. So they engaged in the practise of using, Um, deed of settlement companies, which were not companies, they were kind of trust-like arrangements. And these deeds of settlement companies also came to be economically significant, but they were much less transparent and um they were being used in an unregulated space. So instead of um banning deed of settlement companies, the parliament said, OK, fine, we're gonna legislate for, The Legislate the Companies Act, which provides for this process of registration of companies incorporation by right. And over time, the Company Act, you know, in the space of about 20 years, it was amended to allowed for limited liability as well. So if we then fast forward and, you know, go a couple of 1000 kilometres away to Australia, by the time that Australia federated, the um, By the time of Federation, the Companies Acts were in place in the various, uh, state, in the various colonies. And that was all very, all good and well, but each of the states, because of the interpretation of the constitution, had constitutional responsibility for its Corporations Act. So over time there developed differences between these corporations and the various state company acts. And that meant that it became difficult to engage in trade and commerce across state boundaries. It increased the cost of trade within the new country of Australia. So There then ensued a kind of, A battle around federalism and company law, whereby, some governments on some side of some sides of politics said, you know what, let's make it a state matter, but we'll, let's keep it as a state matter, but just, go back to having a, you know, work on making the company acts in the different company in the different states more uniform. And then on the other side of politics, people saying, no, that's just not working, we need to have the Commonwealth in charge of issues to do with the registration and regulation of companies. And eventually what happened was the uh labour government who took the latter position, centralization of um power in the Commonwealth, tried to do that. The law was struck down by the High Court, everyone said, you know what, this is just too much hassle, it's too inefficient, the states agreed to refer their power, To regulate on corporations to the Commonwealth, and on that basis, the Commonwealth enacted the Corporations Act, the ASIC Act, etc. So Um, that's the basis, namely the constitutional referral power is the basis of the Corporations Act today. Now A mainstream account of company law is that it aims for investor protection, commercial stability, consumer confidence, the balancing of competing interests and legal certainty. That's a fairly, Um, a nuanced account, in my opinion. If we look at the history of company law, we could also say that it's based on the exploitation of people and natural resources, and that's both within and across borders. We can say that it is about, I don't know, enabling creativity or risk taking. Kind of depends what, Um, how you want to characterise the motives and the quality of the activities that are being undertaken in a particular corporation. And to some extent what we think of as the nature and quality of company law depends on what we see as law at all. And without wanting to go all jurisprudential on you, but I can't resist cos I'm an academic. We do have to bear in mind that there are different constructions of what law means in this space. So a very um formalist account of law would say that company law is a certain set of rules and principles that have certain characteristics, and they should be of that law, body of law should be evaluated on whether it um does a good job of fulfilling those ideal characteristics. But a socio-legal account of company law would say that, look, law is not just the law on the books, it is more importantly, the law as practised, it's a process of legal ordering. And company law is then what people do to, um, I don't know, whatever you define a company as and whatever you define the legal process as. So company law could be, um, you could say it's organisational law, maybe company law is no longer the relevant category, or you could say it's um, I don't know, environmental exploitation law, whatever you like, you can come up with a category that captures a salient social process and legal process of legal ordering, conceptualise it and find some evidence that supports its existence. But the bottom line is that company law is not from this perspective, some category we get from um from a cloud and has to bind how we think about the good and the bad in this space. A, a kind of more critical version of that would say that we need to pay attention to the processes of power, or the relations of power that have framed how we are or the types of rules that we get today. What we think of as normal and what is actually allowed to be practised. And I would note that, um, We've gone over time, so I need to stop speaking, I think that's one thing I should note. Um, microeconomic approaches will speak to you probably for themselves in this area because there are so many of them. The basic point is that company law, um, some people say that company law is a sort of natural outgrowth of the needs of the economy. And should be read and assessed in that way. So, um, sorry for going over time, ah enjoy the rest of your afternoon and we'll see you next week. Thank you.

SPEAKER 0
Thanks very much. Yeah.

SPEAKER 1
See you, thanks very much. How are you doing?

SPEAKER 0
Yeah How Hey, no, my pleasure. Assessment of it.
