### JOURNAL OF LAW & SOCIETY

### VOLUME IO, NUMBER 2 WINTER 1983

### 0263-323 X $3.00

The Sociological Concept of Law ROGER COTTERRELL* My concern is with a familiar problem of jurisprudence but transplanted to the context of the sociology of law. The central problem of much of jurisprudence has been that of the definition of law or the specification of the appropriate meaning of the word "law". For a great deal of modern jurisprudence this problem has been virtually identical with that of achieving a scientific understanding of law. For Austin, to define law was to designate the field of a science and to characterise the essential elements of its subject matter. Among more modern writers the search for a definition has been abandoned in favour of the attempt to formulate a concept of law
- a model of law in something of the manner of the models which natural
or social scientists use as guides for the construction of theories and for the formulation of hypotheses to be tested by empirical research. Yet the problem of the concept of law remains central to jurisprudence, something more than a starting point for inquiry. For the sociology of law the objectives of specifying a concept of law are often different from although not indifferent to - the concerns of many jurists. My purpose in this paper is to outline in general terms some approaches to specification of a concept of law which have characterised modern sociological study of law, to consider some of their implications and to suggest some reasons why certain conceptualisations of law may be more useful to the sociology of law than others.

### DIFFERING USES OF A CONCEPT OF LAW

### The terms jurisprudence and sociology of law are too vague a
too many diverse objectives and methods of legal analy generalisation. For that reason I propose to use a distinct normative legal theory - which I take to be a centrally impo the territory of contemporary jurisprudence, in a sense its empirical legal theory, which I take to be central to the con sociology of law. By normative legal theory I mean theory w explain the character of law solely in terms of the conceptua legal doctrine and the relationships between rules, principles, values held to be presupposed or incorporated explicitly within it. By empirical legal theory I mean theory which see

* Faculty of Laws, Queen Mary College, London.


in these societies, which also inform or influence the outlook of jurists. The variety of aims with which sociological study of law may be pursued and its lack of commitment to legal professional concerns have, however, already been suggested above. We should therefore expect less uniformity in basic conceptualisations of law in sociologically oriented literature. Sociological concepts of law are also, in general, formulated in a less sophisticated and elaborate manner than in normative legal theory. In part this is because, as I have suggested, for normative legal theory definition or conceptualisation of law is an end in itself. It constitutes knowledge of law rather than, as with sociological study of law, a preliminary stage in organising empirical study beyond legal doctrine as well as within it. Yet it can be suggested that sociological studies have been in some measure intimidated by the massive bulk of existing conceptual analysis of law within the literature of normative legal theory. The problem here is that a concept of law must take account of, though not necessarily treat as central, the nature of law as doctrine (unless, as for example in Donald Black's work[5], doctrine is almost entirely excluded from a concept of law framed in strictly behavioural terms). Thus a sociology of law which seeks, inter alia, to analyse the social significance of legal doctrine must confront jurists' conceptions of the nature of legal doctrine. The legal sociologist must become a lawyer in order to challenge or go beyond lawyers' conceptions of law.

### SOCIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS OF LAW: A SKETCH OF A TYPOLOGY


importance of legal ideas as responses to fundamental problems of social interaction quite independent of the state yet developed at one particular level in the political life of the state. The fundamental problem of most such pluralist approaches is that of explaining the relationship between levels of law.[16] Hence these concepts seem to many writers to be wholly inadequate to confront the political dimensions of law, while for others they imaginatively open up the possibilities of interpreting its complex social dimensions. c) State law as the dominant but not exclusive form of law

### The third type of sociological conceptualisation of law offers a kind of

processes nor adjudicative processes as central, but emphasises the integrity of doctrine whatever the nature of the institutional processes in which doctrine is developed. "Legality", in some such approaches, becomes a centrally important concept - indeed, the essence of the legal
- implying procedural prerequisites and consequences of the coherent


possibility that the experience of forms of social organisation quite separate from the official state legal system may yield insights into problems of normative order which are typically considered only in relation to state or lawyers' law.[29] The experience of "simpler" legal orders of simpler social systems than that of the nation state may offer legal insights in a manner somewhat parallel to the insights into complex societies which anthropologists have often claimed as one special justification for the study of relatively simple societies. These kinds of considerations suggest links between aspects of the concerns of the sociology of law and of the sociology of organisations. Indeed, at one stage in the recent development of the sociology of law influences from this other field of social research were manifest.[30] Interestingly a recent survey of problems of the field of the sociology of organisations has called for a reorientation of emphases to take account of the increasing importance of phenomenological perspectives and other recent developments in theory.[31] Thus Peter Manning notes the failure of sociological studies to find a way of specifying in objective terms the nature of organisations and calls for a recognition of the importance of the conceptions of the organisation held by those participating in it. Occupational culture is thus of great importance. It provides the image of the organisation for those involved in it; "the framework around which organisational work is legitimated".[32] It acts as a "grid or screen by which events are defined and also makes relevant internal rules".[33] Using empirical data on police organisation as a foundation for analysis, Manning identifies three elements which constitute occupational culture: principles (the most abstract statement of culture), working rules ("by which the principles are translated into the everyday negotiated bases for work"[34]) and actual work practices. He goes so far as to set out a detailed code of such principles and rules for the occupational culture of the police he studied in London and in the United States. It is important to stress that an analysis in terms of the relation of rules and principles offers only one possible and partial approach to the problem of analysis of a structure of normative regulation. Yet the parallel with more familiar issues of legal theory seems obvious. From an entirely different point of view it might be asked whether a sociology of law tied to lawyers' conventional definitions of law ties itself to a form of regulation which may be gradually decreasing in importance.

### Numerous forms of bureaucratic regulation and control seem to be

aspects of any such transformation and all the varied forms of control which have been discussed in recent critical literature.[36] Yet it can be argued that the sociology of law must take sufficient account, as central to its project, of forms of regulation going far beyond the boundaries of state or lawyers' law: sufficient, that is, so as to be able to make assessments of the nature of changes in patterns of regulation fundamentally important to any judgment of the changing social significance of the lawyers' law of the state.

### The conclusion to which these arguments lead is that, in general terms, a


much that is of major significance in the enforcement and dispute processing foci. As many writers have stressed, ideology cloaks power and class relations at the same time as it protects and guarantees them. Pashukanis suggested that "defence of the so-called abstract foundations of the legal system is the most general form of defence of bourgeois class interests".[41] Also from another viewpoint, it has been stressed in modern discussions of power that one of its vital forms is the power to set the agenda of debate or decision[42], a matter which depends significantly on ideological conditions.[43] Similarly it can be argued that legal dispute processing is by and large effective to "cool out" conflicts because of the acceptance of court procedures which depend for their authority on the ideological foundations and effects of legal doctrine. The court is seen to act impersonally in applying the law. To compare various kinds of informal dispute processing mechanisms without analysing as centrally significant the ideological conditions under which legal dispute processing takes place may lead to unrealistic expectations of the effects of informal processes. Yet it would be as misleading to reduce all questions of power to analyses of ideology as it would be to explain the character of ideology in all its many forms and effects as the direct expression of coercive relations. At the same time as the elaboration of law as doctrine appears as a means of developing and sustaining ideology it can be seen also as a technical means by which the exercise of power is formalised and so co-ordinated as a precision instrument of control at many "levels" or in many aspects of social life. The choice of a concept of law is, thus, in social science merely a starting point for analysis. Yet, in important respects it may influence the agenda of research and the forms which the sociological imagination takes in legal study.

### NOTES AND REFERENCES

This is a revised and expanded version of a paper delivered at a seminar at th Edinburgh on February 11th 1983. I am grateful to the Edinburgh Departme dence for the invitation to present these ideas and to all those who discus occasion; also to Peter Fitzpatrick for his helpful comments on a subsequen [1] G. Gurvitch, Sociology of Law (1947) 7. Such objectives may offer the of sympathetic support from lawyers at "the level of mutual service" (W Brit. J. Law and Society 5-6) and help to disarm "powerful antagonist cit. 1). See also J. Carbonnier, Sociologie juridique (1978) 369 ff.

### [2] See e.g. A. Podgorecki, Law and Society (1974) 47, suggesting sociol
empirical replacement for jurisprudence. Eugen Ehrlich, Fundamental P Sociology of Law (1936), following the tenets of the Freirechtslehre ju sociology of law partly as a substitute for conceptual analysis and partly basis (pp. 339-340). Meehl, "Law and the Fireside Inductions: Some R Clinical Psychologist" in Law, Justice and the Individual in Society (1 and F. Levine) is typical of much writing from a psychological perspecti polemic emphasising the roots of this approach within "realist" juris

### Cohen, "Transcendental Nonsense and the Functional Approach" (1


Rev. 809; "Legal concepts are supernatural entities which do not have a verifiable existence except to the eyes of faith" (p. 821). [3] Cf. D. Nelken, "Sociology of Law v. Socio-Legal Studies: The False Divide". Paper presented at University of Kent Conference on Critical Legal Scholarship April 1981; Nelken, "The 'Gap Problem' in the Sociology of Law: A Theoretical Review" (1981) 1 Windsor Yearbook of Access of Justice 35-61. [4] See e.g., Lloyd, Introduction to Jurisprudence (4th ed. 1979) 50-51, 88-90; R. Summers, "Professor Fuller on Morality and Law" in More Essays in Legal Philosophy (1971; ed. R. Summers); Symposium on The Morality of Law (1965) 10 Villanova Law Rev. 631. Cf. Summers, "Professor Fuller's Jurisprudence and America's Dominant Philosophy of Law" (1978) 92 Harv. L. Rev, 433, where, in the course of a sympathetic discussion, the changing attitude to Fuller's work in recent commentaries is noted. [5] Especially The Behaviour of Law (1976). [6] General Theory of Law and State (1945) 190-1. [7] Pashukanis' work provides the most interesting exception to this, where an attempt is made to combine a Leninist conception of the state with a theory of law derived from Marx's analysis of the fetishism of commodities. But the result is a vague and ambiguous analysis of the legal functions of the state inappropriate to the political project of Soviet Marxism at the time in which he wrote, and which provides a major reason for the rejection of the theory in Marxist politics. See E.B. Pashukanis, General Theory of Law and Marxism (1978) Ch. 5; R. Cotterrell, "Commodity Form and Legal Form: Pashukanis' Outline of a Materialist Theory of Law" (1979) Ideology and Consciousness No. 6 111-119. [8] This despite the fact that several sophisticated recent Marxist analyses of the state have deliberately rejected its common sense connotation of government agencies in preference for a conception which stresses the pervasiveness of state controls in the "private" sphere. Most important in this respect is the work of Poulantzas and Althusser, and modern interpretations of Gramsci's insights. Law, however, tends to remain conceptualised in these writings as lawyers' law applied by and to government agencies, although, notably in Althusser's concept of ideological state apparatuses, its pervasiveness as ideology through many levels social relations is accepted. [9] Black, op. cit., 2, See also his "The Boundaries of Legal Sociology" (1972) 81 Yale L. J. 1086, where the concept is held to be "more inclusive than an American lawyer might deem proper" but to exclude such forms of social control as "bureaucratic rules in private organisations". While the concept undoubtedly lacks precision and in Black's view can encompass "any act by a political body that concerns the definition of social order or its defence" it is clear that in research practice it functions as a strictly behavioural version of the state law conception.

### [10] Law and Society 46.

### [11] Law in Modern Society (1976).


Organizational Analysis" (1976) 4 American Politics Quarterly 86, But present concerns seem to be with organisational problems of the state legal system rather than with the regulatory problems of organisations analysed as problems relevant to legal theory. [31] P. K. Manning, "Organisational Work: Structuration of Environments" (1982) 33 British Journal of Sociology 118. [32] Ibid. 125. [331 Ibid. 130. [34] Ibid. 125. [35] See e.g. D. Nelken, "Is There a Crisis in Law and Legal Ideology?" (1982) 9 Journal of Law and Society 177. [36] See especially Michel Foucault's various writings, T. Mathiesen, Law, Society and Political Action (1980) and J. Donzelot, The Policing of Families: Welfare Versus the State (1980). [37] Pashukanis, op. cit, 83. [38] Cf. R. B. Ferguson, "The Adjudication of Commercial Disputes and the Legal System in Modern England" (1980) 7 Brit. J. Law and Society 141, 146. [39] For a discussion of the significance of these problems for legal theory see R. Cotterrell, "Conceptualizing Law: Problems and Prospects of Contemporary Legal Theory" (1981) 10 Economy and Society 348, 359-363. [40] See especially P. Hirst, On Law and Ideology (1979) 22-39. [41] Op. cit. 39. [42] P. Bachrach & M. Baratz, Power and Poverty: Theory and practice (1970)

### [43] S. Lukes, Power (1974) 23.
