**1. Introduction**

**1 This report**

The central task of the Commission has been to inquire into, and report on, whether any conduct of **financial services entities** might have amounted to misconduct and whether any conduct, practices, behaviour or business activities by those entities fell below community standards and expectations. The conduct identified and described in the Commission’s _Interim Report_ and the further conduct identified and described in this Report includes conduct by many entities that has taken place over many years causing substantial loss to many customers but yielding substantial profit to the entities concerned. Very often, the conduct has broken the law. And if it has not broken the law, the conduct has fallen short of the kind of behaviour the community not only expects of financial services entities but is also entitled to expect of them. This _Final Report_ seeks to take what has been learned in respect of each part of the financial services industry that has been examined and identify:

• issues;
• causes; and
• responses and recommendations.

**1.1 Four observations**

Those analyses, taken together, will reveal the importance of four observations about what has been shown by the Commission’s work: the connection between conduct and reward; the asymmetry of power and information between financial services entities and their customers; the effect of conflicts between duty and interest; and holding entities to account. Each of those observations should be explained. First, in almost every case, the conduct in issue was driven not only by the relevant entity’s pursuit of profit but also by individuals’ pursuit of gain,

**1**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
whether in the form of remuneration for the individual or profit for the individual’s business. Providing a service to customers was relegated to second place. Sales became all important. Those who dealt with customers became sellers. And the confusion of roles extended well beyond front line service staff. Advisers became sellers and sellers became advisers. The conduct identified and condemned in this _Final Report_ and in the _Interim Report_ can and should be examined by reference to how the person doing the relevant acts, or failing to do what should have been done, was rewarded for the conduct. Rewarding misconduct is wrong. Yet incentive, bonus and commission schemes throughout the financial services industry have measured sales and profit, but not compliance with the law and proper standards. Incentives have been offered, and rewards have been paid, regardless of whether the sale was made, or profit derived, in accordance with law. Rewards have been paid regardless of whether the person rewarded _should_ have done what they did. Second, entities and individuals acted in the ways they did because they could. Entities set the terms on which they would deal, consumers often had little detailed knowledge or understanding of the transaction and consumers had next to no power to negotiate the terms. At most, a consumer could choose from an array of products offered by an entity, or by that entity and others, and the consumer was often not able to make a well‑informed choice between them. There was a marked imbalance of power and knowledge between those providing the product or service and those acquiring it. Third, consumers often dealt with a financial services entity through an intermediary. The client might assume that the person standing between the client and the entity that would provide a financial service or product acted for the client and in the client’s interests. But, in many cases, the intermediary is paid by, and may act in the interests of, the provider of the service or product. Or, if the intermediary does not act for the provider, the intermediary may act only in the interests of the intermediary. The interests of client, intermediary and provider of a product or service are not only different, they are opposed. An intermediary who seeks to ‘stand in

**2**Final Report
more than one canoe’ cannot.1 Duty (to client) and (self) interest pull in opposite directions. Chapter 7 of the _Corporations Act 2001_ (Cth) (the Corporations Act), and the _National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009_ (Cth) (the NCCP Act) (but not the _Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993_ (Cth) – the SIS Act), speak of ‘managing’ conflicts of interest.2 But experience shows that conflicts between duty and interest can seldom be managed; self‑interest will almost always trump duty. The evidence given to the Commission showed how those who were acting for a client too often resolved conflicts between duty to the client, and the interests of the entity, adviser or intermediary, in favour of the interests of the entity, adviser or intermediary and against the interests of the client. Those persons and entities obliged to pursue the best interests of clients or members too often sought to strike some compromise between the interests of clients or members and their own interests or the interests of a related third party (such as the person’s employer, or the entity’s owner). A ‘good enough’ outcome was pursued instead of the _best_ interests of the relevant clients or members. (Notions of best interests and conflicts between duty and interest are further examined below in connection with **mortgage brokers**, financial advice and superannuation.) Fourth, too often, financial services entities that broke the law were not properly held to account. Misconduct will be deterred only if entities believe that misconduct will be detected, denounced and justly punished. Misconduct, especially misconduct that yields profit, is not deterred by requiring those who are found to have done wrong to do no more than pay compensation. And wrongdoing is not denounced by issuing a media release. The Australian community expects, and is entitled to expect, that if an entity breaks the law and causes damage to customers, it will compensate those affected customers. But the community also expects that financial services entities that break the law will be held to account. The community

1 _Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Ame_

(2005) 222 CLR 439, 448. 2 The SIS Act requires trustees to give priority to the duties to and interests of the beneficiaries over the duties to, or the interests of, others. See s 52(2)(d).

**3**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
recognises, and the community expects its regulators to recognise, that these are two different steps: having a wrongdoer compensate those harmed is one thing; holding wrongdoers to account is another. Some may see what has emerged from the work of the Commission only through the lens of public accountability for what has happened. And public accountability is critically important. But it cannot be the only focus. It is necessary to look to the future as well as to the past. The responses and recommendations made in this Report will attract varied responses. Those who oppose change will appeal to real or supposed difficulty in altering present arrangements. Reference will be made to change bringing ‘unintended consequences’. That argument is easily made because it has no content; the ‘consequences’ feared are not identified. But choices must now be made. The arrangements of the past have allowed conduct of the kinds and extent described here and in the _Interim Report_ of the Commission. The damage done by that conduct to individuals and to the overall health and reputation of the financial services industry has been large. Saying sorry and promising not to do it again has not prevented recurrence. The time has come to decide what is to be done in response to what has happened. The financial services industry is too important to the economy of the nation to allow what has happened in the past to continue or to happen again.

**1.2 Primary responsibility**

There can be no doubt that the primary responsibility for misconduct in the financial services industry lies with the entities concerned and those who managed and controlled those entities: their boards and senior management. Nothing that is said in this Report should be understood as diminishing that responsibility. Everything that is said in this Report is to be understood in the light of that one undeniable fact: it is those who engaged in misconduct who are responsible for what they did and for the consequences that followed. Because it is the entities, their boards and senior executives who bear primary responsibility for what has happened, close attention must be given to their culture, their governance and their remuneration practices.

**4**Final Report

**1.3 Key questions**

In its written submission in response to the _Interim Report_, Treasury identified the key questions emerging from the _Interim Report_ as:3 • To what extent can the law be simplified so that its intent is met, rather than merely its terms being complied with, and how can this be done? • Should the approach to addressing conflicts of interest change from managing conflicts to removing them, either by banning all or some forms of **conflicted remuneration** and sales or profit‑based remuneration and/or changing industry structures? • What can be done to improve compliance with the law (and industry codes), and the effectiveness of the regulators, to deter misconduct and ensure that grave misconduct meets with proportionate consequences? Treasury submitted that a fourth key question should be added:4 • What more can be done to achieve effective leadership, good governance and appropriate culture within financial services firms so that firms ‘obey the law, do not mislead or deceive, are fair, provide fit for purpose service with care and skill, and act in the best interests of their clients’? Treasury submitted that answers to these four questions ‘would form the pillars of any comprehensive policy response to what the Commission has publicly exposed’.5 I agree. These are the pillars of the policy responses to be made. And, as is explained in the body of the Report, some particular changes to the law are necessary to improve protections for consumers against misconduct, to provide adequate redress and to address asymmetries of power and information between entities and consumers. 3 Treasury, Interim Report Submission, 1 [2].

4 Treasury, Interim Report Submission, 1 [3]. See also, FSRC, _Interim Report_, vol 1, 290.

5 Treasury, Interim Report Submission, 1 [4].

**5**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry

**1.4 Extending the Commission**

Why deal with these issues now? Why make my _Final Report_ now? Why not extend the work of the Commission? Many suggested that I seek an extension of the time by which my _Final Report_ was due to allow for further public hearings. I did not seek any extension of time for this _Final Report_ for the reasons I gave in the Introduction to the _Interim Report_. As I said there:6 The Letters Patent require me to inquire into, and report on, whether any conduct by financial services entities, including banks and their associated entities, might have amounted to misconduct and whether any conduct, practices, behaviour or business activities by those entities fall below community standards and expectations. I must execute those tasks conscious of the fact that the banking system is a central artery in the body of the economy. Defects and obstructions in the artery can have very large effects. Likewise, prolonged injections of doubt and uncertainty can affect performance. I concluded then, and remain of the view, that these reasons oblige me to execute my tasks promptly and do so in ways that would achieve two related purposes: to identify properly the underlying causes of conduct of the kinds referred to in the Terms of Reference; and to prompt proper consideration of how best to avoid recurrence of similar conduct. One reason often given for proposing to extend the work of the Commission was to give more persons who had been affected by relevant misconduct the chance to give evidence of those events. Throughout the work of the Commission I have paid close regard, and given great significance, to the Commission conducting a public inquiry so that there might be public exposure of misconduct and the vindication those affected by misconduct derive from its being exposed. All of the many public submissions made to the Commission were read and considered, and many were considered repeatedly.

6 FSRC, _Interim Report_, vol 1, 1.

**6**Final Report

Not every complaint that was made could be publicly examined. There were too many to do that. Hence, choices had to be made and, inevitably, the choices that were made will have disappointed those not chosen. But the cases that were the subject of case studies were chosen as being reasonably illustrative of kinds of conduct and general issues that could be seen as emerging from the very active public engagement with the Commission’s work and from the Commission’s own investigations. The case studies provided a sufficiently broad and firm platform for drawing the conclusions that are expressed in this Report. Multiplying examples would not have altered the breadth or depth of that platform to any useful extent. And, as I point out more than once in this Report, every financial services entity, whether examined in a case study or not, must look at its own conduct and the way in which it governs itself. The decision not to seek an extension was taken recognising that the Commission could provide no remedy to those who complained that they had been affected by misconduct. The most that could be done was to provide them with a public platform to voice their complaint. I recognise the importance of a Royal Commission in giving public voice to the issues and concerns that prompted its establishment. But the decision not to seek extension was also taken recognising the central importance that the health of the financial system has for the nation’s economy and thus for every member of this society. For me, these wider considerations were determinative. It is time to grapple with the key questions identified. And it is necessary, therefore, to state plainly the principles and general rules that underpin the answers that are to be given.

**1.5 Underlying principles and general rules**

In my _Interim Report_ I asked many questions. As I said at that time, I sought to provoke informed and useful debate about the issues that have emerged in the course of the Commission’s inquiries. Many of those questions were explored in the course of the final round of the Commission’s public hearings and in the many submissions made to the Commission. Submissions were received from financial services entities; the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA); the

**7**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry

Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC); Treasury; those who have been affected by the conduct that has been the subject of the Commission’s inquiries; other interested parties given leave to appear at some of the Commission’s hearings (including the Finance Sector Union and consumer bodies such as CHOICE and the Consumer Action Law Centre); industry associations (including the Australian Banking Association (ABA) bodies representing financial advisers, mortgage brokers and others); academics; and members of the public more generally. The focus of this Report must be on issues, causes and responses. I will deal separately with the various sectors of the financial services industry. More particularly I will deal separately with: • banking; • financial advice; • superannuation; and • insurance. Some more general issues extend across all sectors of the financial services industry. They are issues about • culture, governance and remuneration; and • regulators. The responses to the issues that are identified in each of those separate areas are informed by some underlying principles. It is useful, therefore, to begin by stating those principles.

**1.5.1 Underlying principles**

At their most basic, the underlying principles reflect the six norms of conduct I identified in the _Interim Report_: • obey the law; • do not mislead or deceive; • act fairly;

**8**Final Report

• provide services that are fit for purpose; • deliver services with reasonable care and skill; and • when acting for another, act in the best interests of that other. These norms of conduct are fundamental precepts. Each is well‑established, widely accepted, and easily understood. Of course, when these norms are stated in the terms I have, it will be said that borderline cases can be identified. And applying the norms to some of those borderline cases may not be easy. But real or imagined cases testing the boundaries of a rule do not show that the rule has no content. Debate about whether the wire runs one side or the other of one or more fence posts must not obscure the size of the field the fence encloses. The six norms of conduct I have identified are all reflected in existing law. But the reflection is piecemeal. The general obligations of **Australian financial services licence** (AFSL) holders, stated in section 912A of the Corporations Act, and the general obligations of **Australian Credit Licence** (ACL) holders, stated in section 47 of the NCCP Act, stand out. First, both provisions impose an overarching obligation to ‘do all things necessary to ensure’ that the financial services or credit activities authorised by the licence are provided ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’.7 Understood properly, this requirement would embrace all six norms. Second, both provisions oblige licence holders to comply with, in the case of AFSL holders, the financial services laws and, in the case of ACL holders, the credit legislation.8 That is, licence holders must obey the law. Third, both provisions oblige licence holders to maintain their own competence to provide the licenced services and to ensure that their representatives are both adequately trained and competent to provide 7 Corporations Act s 912A(1)(a); NCCP Act s 47(1)(a). 8 Corporations Act s 912A(1)(c); NCCP Act s 47(1)(d).

**9**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
those services.9 That is, they are required to have the _capacity_ to deliver services with reasonable care and skill. As the law now stands, breach of these general obligations carries no penalty. They are licence conditions enforceable only indirectly, by threatening withdrawal of the licence. That said, the requirement that an AFSL holder acts honestly is expressed further in section 1041G of the Corporations Act, which makes it an offence to engage in dishonest conduct in relation to a **financial product** or financial service. But the offence relates only to conduct in relation to a financial product or financial service, and Divisions 3 and 4 of Part 7.1 of the Corporations Act are given over to defining what is, and is not, a financial product, and when a person provides a financial service. The more particular norms I state about not misleading or deceiving and acting fairly are reflected in the provisions of the _Australian Securities and_ _Investment Commission Act 2001_ (Cth) (the ASIC Act) about misleading or deceptive conduct,10 false or misleading representations,11 unconscionable conduct12 and unfair contract terms.13 And the requirement to provide services that are fit for purpose and deliver services with reasonable care and skill are also reflected in the ASIC Act.14 But some of those provisions apply generally and some apply only to dealings with consumers. And the unconscionable conduct and consumer protection provisions use definitions of ‘financial product’ and ‘financial service’ that differ from those provided by Chapter 7 of the Corporations Act.15 The sixth norm – when acting for another, act in the best interests of that other – is reflected in the financial advice sector by the best interests duty imposed by section 961B of the Corporations Act, together with the 9 Corporations Act s 912A(1)(e) and (f); NCCP Act s 47(1)(e) and (f). 10 ASIC Act s 12DA. 11 ASIC Act s 12DB. 12 ASIC Act ss 12CA–12CC. 13 ASIC Act ss 12BF–12BM. 14 ASIC Act ss 12EA–12ED. 15 ASIC Act ss 12BAA,12BAB.

**10**Final Report
associated obligation provided by section 961J to give priority to the client’s interests over other interests. The norms are dealt with differently in respect of superannuation and insurance. In superannuation, they find their most prominent reflection in the SIS Act, in the best interests covenant and associated covenants by **registrable superannuation entity** (RSE) licensees and directors of trustees.16 And those covenants also provide direct reflection of the norm that a person or entity acting for another, must act in the best interests of that other. In insurance, all of the norms may be seen as embodied in the duty of utmost good faith imposed on each party to an insurance contract by section

13 of the _Insurance Contracts Act 1984_ (Cth) (the Insurance Contracts Act).

As I say, the six norms of conduct I have set out are reflected in existing law, but the reflection is piecemeal.

**1.5.2 General rules**

The six norms of conduct I have identified support, and in some cases entail, some general rules: • • • • the law must be applied and its application enforced; industry codes should be approved under statute and breach of key promises made to customers in the codes should be a breach of the statute; no financial product should be ‘hawked’ to retail clients; intermediaries should act only on behalf of, and in the interests of, the party who pays the intermediary; • exceptions to the ban on conflicted remuneration should be eliminated; 16 SIS Act ss 52, 52A.

**11**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry

• culture and governance practices (including remuneration arrangements) both in the industry generally and in individual entities, must focus on non-financial risk, as well as financial risk. Why these general rules? _Apply and enforce the law_ The first general rule, that the law must be applied and its application enforced, requires no development or explanation. It is a defining feature of a society governed by the rule of law. The conduct identified and criticised in the Commission’s _Interim Report_ and in this Report has been of a nature and extent that shows that the law has not been obeyed, and has not been enforced effectively. It also points to deficiencies of culture, governance and risk management within entities. Too often, entities have paid too little attention to issues of regulatory, compliance and conduct risks. And the risks of regulatory or other non‑compliance and of misconduct are the risks of departure from the first general rule of ‘obey the law’. What consequences follow, and whether this amounts to effective enforcement of the law, bears directly upon the nature and extent of the regulatory, compliance and conduct risks that entities must manage. _Industry codes_ Industry codes are expressed as promises made by industry participants. If industry codes are to be more than public relations puffs, the promises made must be made seriously. If they are made seriously (and those bound by the codes say that they are), the promises that are set out in the code, and are intended to govern the particular relations between the provider and the acquirer of a financial product or financial service, must be kept. This must entail that the promises can be enforced by those to whom the promises are made: the customer who acquires the product or service, and the guarantors of loans to individuals and small businesses.

**12**Final Report

_Hawking_ ‘Hawking’ company securities, by making unsolicited approaches to potential buyers, has long been unlawful.17 The practice has long been unlawful because it too readily allows the fraudulent or unscrupulous to prey upon the unsuspecting.18 There is no real check on what is said to the target and often the target is not able to check the truth of what is said. The asymmetry of power and information between the provider of the product and service and the acquirer is very large. Even if the ‘hawker’ is not fraudulent or unscrupulous (and, too often, cases examined in evidence showed that the hawker was at least unscrupulous) the acquirer is nevertheless ‘unsuspecting’. The potential acquirer who has not sought out the product or service comes to the encounter unprepared to look critically at whatever is said. The potential acquirer often does not know what questions to ask. Hawking financial products and managed investment products is now generally prohibited.19 But there are some exceptions. Other than the provisions relating to offers _not_ made to retail clients and offers made under an eligible employee share scheme,20 however, there is no immediately apparent basis for thinking that the exceptions are areas where the fraudulent or unscrupulous may not yet prey upon the unsuspecting. And the evidence given to the Commission points firmly against maintaining exceptions to the general prohibition, at least in respect of superannuation and insurance products, other than the two exceptions mentioned: offers _not_ made to retail clients and offers made under an eligible employee share scheme. For the avoidance of doubt, it should also be made plain that a solicited meeting, or telephone call, to discuss one type of financial product must not 17 18 19 20 The 1926 Report of the UK Company Law Amendment Committee chaired by Mr Wilfrid Greene KC (Cmnd 2657) recommended that the offering from house to house of shares, stock, bonds, debentures or debenture stock or similar securities either for subscription or sale should be made an offence. Hawking company securities has long been an offence under Australian company law. See now Corporations Act s 736. United Kingdom, Report of the UK Company Law Amendment Committee (Cmnd 2657), 48 [92]. Corporations Act ss 992A and 992AA. Corporations Act ss 992A(3A) and (3B).

**13**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
be used for the unsolicited offering of some other type of product. (In that regard, common forms of banking products, like transaction accounts and credit card accounts should be treated as together forming the one kind of product. But each superannuation product and each insurance product is, and should be treated as, a distinct product type.) _Intermediaries_ In the _Interim Report_, I pointed out how difficult it may be to decide for whom intermediaries act and to whom a particular intermediary may owe duties and responsibilities.21 As I indicated then, the difficulties may be acute in the case of mortgage brokers. But the difficulties are not confined to home lending. Point-of-sale negotiation of credit arrangements (by car dealers, white goods retailers and the like) presents similar difficulties. The point is much more important than a dry point of legal analysis. For whom the intermediary acts determines what duties the intermediary owes and to whom they owe them. The general rule that should apply throughout the financial services industry is that an intermediary who is paid to act as intermediary: • acts for the person who _pays_ the intermediary; • owes the person who pays a duty to act _only in the interests_ of that person; and • ordinarily owes the person who pays a duty to act in the _best_ interests of that person. The particular working out of these principles, especially with respect to mortgage brokers and the home lending market, is dealt with in the chapter about banking. _Conflicted remuneration_ The definition of ‘conflicted remuneration’ in the Corporations Act shows why the practice should be prohibited.

21 FSRC, _Interim Report_, vol 1, 56–9.

**14**Final Report

Section 963A of the Corporations Act defines ‘conflicted remuneration’ as any benefit (whether monetary or non‑monetary) given to a **financial** **services licensee** or a representative of the licensee, who provides financial product advice to persons as retail clients, that, because of the nature of the benefit or the circumstances in which it is given, could have either or both of two effects: • it could reasonably be expected to influence the choice of financial product recommended by the licensee or representative to retail clients; or • it could reasonably be expected to influence the financial product advice given to retail clients by the licensee or representative. That is, as I said in the _Interim Report_, ‘the very hinge about which the conflicted remuneration provisions turn is that the payment is one that “could reasonably be expected to influence the choice of financial product recommended to retail clients”’.22 For **grandfathered commissions**, the time when the initial advice was given and the initial conflict arose has passed. The influence of the commission has already done its work once. But the problem remains. The influence continues. Advisers have an incentive to keep their clients in products with grandfathered commissions rather than advise them to move to better products. There can be, and is, no justification for maintaining the grandfathering provisions. _Culture and governance_ After the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), financial services entities and regulators, in Australia and elsewhere, gave close attention to financial risk. Until recently, however, too little attention has been given in Australia to regulatory, compliance and conduct risks. Too little attention has been given to the evident connections between compensation, incentive and remuneration practices and regulatory, compliance and conduct risks. The very large reputational consequences that are now seen in the Australian financial services industry, especially in the banking industry, stand as the clearest demonstration of the pressing urgency for dealing with these

22 FSRC, _Interim Report_, vol 1, 92.

**15**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
issues. As the Group of Thirty (G30) said in November 2018, ‘getting culture and conduct right is not a supervisory requirement. It is necessary for banks’ and banking’s economic and social sustainability’.23

**1.5.3 Making change carefully and simply**

Treasury,24 and many of the entities that made submissions,25 urged the need for caution before recommending change. This is undeniably right. As I said in the _Interim Report_, adding a new layer of regulation will not assist. It will add to what is already a complex regulatory regime. No doubt the financial services industry is itself complicated. That may be said to explain why the regulatory regime is as complicated as it is. But closer attention will show that much of the complication comes from piling exception upon exception, from carving out special rules for special interests. And, in almost every case, these special rules qualify the application of a more general principle to entities or transactions that are not different in any material way from those to which the general rule is applied. History shows, as Treasury submitted, that legislative simplification can be a long and difficult task. Programs to simplify the law relating to income taxation and to reform corporate law have extended over many years – well beyond the life of a single Parliament. And I do not doubt that simplifying the law that relates to the financial services industry would be a large task. But there are two parts of that task that can inform, and I consider should inform, what is done in response to this Report. First, it is time to start reducing the number and the area of operation of special rules, exceptions and carve outs. Reducing their number and their area of operation is itself a large step towards simplificiation. Not only that,

23 24 25 G30, _Banking Conduct and Culture: A Permanent Mindset Change_,

November 2018, Foreword, v. Treasury, Interim Report Submission, 1 [4]–[5]. See, eg, AMP, Interim Report Submission, 7 [34]; ANZ, Interim Report Submission, 2 [11]; CBA, Interim Report Submission, 41 [223]; Westpac, Interim Report Submission, 2 [6]; NAB, Interim Report Submission, 17 [50]; Mortgage Choice, Interim Report Submission, 3 [3].

**16**Final Report
it leaves less room for ‘gaming’ the system by forcing events or transactions into exceptional boxes not intended to contain them.26 Second, it is time to draw explicit connections in the legislation between the particular rules that are made and the fundamental norms to which those rules give effect. Drawing that connection will have three consequences. It will explain to the regulated community (and the regulator) _why_ the rule is there and, at the same time, reinforce the importance of the relevant fundamental norm of conduct. Not only that, drawing this explicit connection will put beyond doubt the purpose that the relevant rule is intended to achieve. And, the further consequence will be to highlight the fact that exceptions and carve outs like grandfathered commissions constitute a departure from applying the relevant fundamental norm. Emphasising the fact of departure may assist in reducing both the number and the extent of these qualifications. In their submissions, some entities used the undoubted need for care in recommending change as a basis for saying that there should be _no_ change. The ‘Caution’ sign was read as if it said ‘Do Not Enter’. An assertion was necessarily implicit in the submissions that sought to maintain some aspect of the present regime unchanged: that doing nothing about those matters would carry less cost than making _any_ change to the rules under consideration. But rarely, if ever, was the submission developed beyond the point of bare assertion. Rarely, if ever, was there explicit examination of, or comparison between, the costs of doing nothing and the costs and consequences of changing the rules. The rules that govern grandfathered commissions provide a useful example. Two grounds have often been given for maintaining the present rules about grandfathered commissions without modification: orderly transition and constitutional infirmity. If the provisions were made to allow orderly transition within the industry, that time has now passed. How much longer is the transition to take? For all the suggestions that it will ‘wither on the vine’, the charging and receipt of 26 For example, the preservation of grandfathered commissions during a successor fund transfer by potentially treating the succeeding RSE licensee as a ‘platform operator’: see the NULIS Nominees (Australia) Ltd case study discussed in vol 2 of this Report.

**17**Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
grandfathered commissions remained alive and well until some of the larger participants in the industry (especially the banks) sensed the wind of change may be blowing and found it best to bend now by phasing it out rather than have the wind grow to such intensity that it snap off this branch of their activities. Whenever change is mooted, someone will suggest that changing the permitted forms of remuneration would lead to constitutional difficulties because it would amount to an acquisition of property otherwise than on just terms. As I said in the _Interim Report_, two points must be made.27 First, where would be the acquisition? Who would acquire anything? What proprietary benefit or interest would accrue to any person?28 Second, if the point is good, it was good at the time when most forms of conflicted remuneration were prohibited. Yet no-one sought then to challenge the validity of the relevant provisions and the **Future of** **Financial Advice** (FoFA) ban on conflicted remuneration has now operated for more than five years without challenge. It is time to ignore the ghostly apparition of constitutional challenge conjured forth by those who, for their own financial advantage, oppose change that will free advice about, or recommendation of, financial products from the influence of the adviser’s personal financial advantage. A third point is sometimes made in attempting to justify preserving grandfathered commissions. It is said that prohibiting this form of remuneration once and for all will carry with it unintended consequences and the advice industry will be disrupted. Generalised fears of this kind should not be heeded. ‘Disruption’ and similar terms can be used, and in some submissions to the Commission were used, as little more than pejorative synonyms for ‘change’. As the Treasury submissions show, however, it is always necessary to identify the nature and the extent of the consequences that will or may follow from the change under consideration before speaking of the change as ‘disruptive’. Without identifying those consequences, ‘disruption’ has no useful content.

27 28 FSRC, _Interim Report_, vol 1, 95.

Cf _JT International SA v The Commonwealth_ (2012) 250 CLR 1.

**18**Final Report

If an exception to the rules prohibiting grandfathered commissions is to be preserved, the exception must be closely and cogently justified. Saying only that there may be ‘disruption’ or ‘unintended consequences’ is nothing but a naked appeal to fear of the future. And it seeks to graft some exception onto the body of law intended to give effect to a coherent set of policy objectives without any attempt to identify the competing policy objectives. Creating exceptions that depart from underlying principles has consequences. Those consequences are amply demonstrated by the grandfathering arrangements made in respect of FoFA. ‘Temporary’ or ‘transitional’ carve outs departing from principle too often become (and in this case did become) entrenched. Carve outs and exceptions are too often exploited (and in this case have been exploited) for purposes having nothing to do with the stated purpose of their creation. Creating carve outs and exceptions impedes, and may even prevent (and in this case did prevent) achieving fully the intended policy objectives that inform the body of the law. Instead, the law is (and here it was) made more complex; it is (and here it was) made harder not only for regulators to administer but also for the regulated community, and the public more generally, to understand.
