THE ORIGIN OF THE JOINT-STOCK COMPANY F an historian at some future date were to define the economic structure

### .of our time and the legal forms in which it has found its expression, he
would have to devote a long chapter to the joint-stock company. Hi first enquiry would probably be concerning the origin of this institution.

### Even if he were to bear in mind Professor MacIver's sceptical remark
that "origins are always obscure",1 he might well wonder whether as far as our subject is concerned the obscurity surrounding the object is not partly due to the fact that so many divergent explanations have been propounded by the learned authors who have examined the subject. It is evident that a legal phenomenon such as the joint-stock company is the product of many causes, and that fact may well account for the divergency of views held with regard to the origin of this institution. It is proposed in this study to approach the subject from the point of view of comparative law. An attempt will be made to examine the structure of the institutions concerned because it is thought that this is the most profitable way of trying to locate the seed from which the joint-stock company grew. I

### It is still the leading doctrine that the joint-stock principle originated in

### Italy. Professor Holdsworth may be considered as representative of this

THE ORIGIN OF THE JOINT-STOCK COMPANY 75 As far as the history of the joint stock corporation and its law in detail is concerned, it appears (1) that the oldest joint stock companies (Aktiengesellschaften)-or if we want to be more correct: public institutions trading on a joint stock (Aktiengesellschaften)-have emerged in Italy in the following way: A capital fund created under public authority as a trading institution was divided into shares which conferred a claim on the profits, and these shares were sold. This was e.g. so in case of the Genoan Bank (banca di S. Giorgio) which is considered as the oldest joint stock company in the true sense.5 The thesis of the Italian receptionists is opposed by Professor Scott. After discussing two indigenous tendencies which led to the evolution of the joint-stock company in England, namely the medieval partnership and the growth of the idea of a corporation, he examines the possibilities of Italian influence. He holds' that two main reasons explain the absence of any direct influence from this quarter on the earliest English joint-stock companies: firstly, the fact that Italian commercial and financial relations had declined just at the time when the first English joint-stock enterprises began to emerge; and, secondly, that the transition from the regulated company or the societas of the sixteenth century to the joint-stock form "was so small that it was one that would come almost insensibly by the normal course of commercial and industrial development". Some American authors, particularly Professor Ballantine,7 Professor Berle,s and Professor Dewing,9 and the German Dr. C. Hundhausen,o1 adhere to the same view-a view which for brevity's sake we may call the evolutionist theory. Another German writer, Professor Carl Lehmann, rejects the receptionist view and suggests that the joint-stock company, and especially the Dutch East India Company (1602), developed from the shipping company (Reederei, socitt' d'armateurs), a particular form of the partnership which was also known in this country," but became 'obsolete. The French jurist Fremery"l does not subscribe to the receptionist view but considers the joint-stock company an offshoot of the commenda. Each of the main schools, the receptionists as well as the evolutionists,
50. Gierke, Genossenschaftsrecht, vol. I, at p. 991.
6W. R. Scott, The Constitution and Finance of English, Scottish and Irish Joint-stock Companies to 1720 (Cambridge, 1912), vol. I, p. 13. 7H. W. Ballantine, Manual of Corporation Law and Practice (Chicago, 1930), at pp. 2-7.

### 8A. A. Berle, Studies in the Law of Corporation Finance (Chicago, 1928), at


THE ORIGIN OF THE JOINT-STOCK COMPANY 79 a quarter went to the luogatorios and the rest was divided as bonus among the officials of the bank. These formations in Lucca and Milan can hardly be considered as having completed the transition from the loan ty to the joint-stock type, as the St. George's Bank of Genoa did in 1419. Peri, an Italian writer, whose II Negotiante was published in Genoa 1647, mentions only the two banks of Genoa and Milan. He does n refer to other cases where the Genoan example has been followed, and h alludes to the factories of the foreign trading companies in Italy with obvious envy. Other Italian historians, like Pertiles and Lattes, confirm the view that the St. George's Bank of Genoa has not been fertile for t future development of the joint-stock principle in Italy. For the spreadi northwards of this type of the joint-stock we have no evidence whatev

### (5) In summing up the Italian development, we have to lay stre
on the fact that here the joint-stock principle has evolved from the loa side as it is seen in the case of the St. George's Bank in its transition fr the fixed rate to the dividend in 1419. Thus, an organization had developed which was apt to become the nucleus of a fundamental a universal legal principle but which, owing to the peculiarities of its orig remained an isolated and barren phenomenon. In other words, the the of the receptionists that the St. George's Bank was the mother of the joint-stock principle in Europe is neither in conformance with the stru tural aspect, nor is it supported by the historical development in northe Italy. It is a post factum conclusion, nothing else but a myth, which ow its existence to the fact that the historian is apt to imply unconsciousl logic in his matter which has its basis more in the human tendency t detect causes than in the actual trend of events.

### III

### The development of the joint-stock company in England is cha

80 THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LAW JOURNAL English joint-stock company was designed to afford concentration of means and powers to the explorers who set out to discover trade routes hitherto unknown. The compera never emancipated itself from its origin as an ingenious and well-secured money-lending device. (1) Dr. Carr analyses the idea of corporateness which grew up in the English townships and boroughs, and arrives at the result that it was unaffected by Roman influence. He shows how in the course of the progressive centralization of the country the original conception of corporateness lost its vigour and "the time was coming when the English borough was fit to receive the Italian doctrine--when its personality might be deemed a persona ficta."'9 The early social and religious guilds, which were merely the nonpolitical aspects of the people organized in the townships and boroughs, were naturally governed by the same spirit which animated the political side of their community. "The leading features in any brotherhood, formed for any purpose, were that the members treated each other and named each other as brother and sister; that all were equal before the gild; that they owned some property in common; that they took an oath of fellowship, that no quarrel should develop into a law-suit until an attempt at a settlement had been made before the tribunal of the brotherhood itself, and that if a brother was involved in a quarrel with a stranger to the brotherhood, they agreed to support him for good or for bad."20 We are more particularly interested in the guild merchant. This institution has apparently developed after the Norman conquest. There is some controversy whether the guild merchant was transplanted from Normandy or was merely the commercial expression of the older social and religious guild.2 This, however, matters little because the new form, even if imported from Normandy, fitted structurally in the older religious and social guilds. This is evident from the research of Professor Scott who has compared the constitution of the two aspects of guild life.22 It may, further, be seen from the fact that according to the preamble' of a 19C. T. Carr, "Early Forms of Corporateness" in Select Essays in AngloAmerican Legal History, vol. III, at pp. 161, 167, 182. 20F. W. Dendy in the Introduction to Records of the Merchant Adventurers of Newcastle-upon-Tyne (Surtees Society, vols. XCIII and CI), vol. I, p. xvi. 21C. Gross, The Gild Merchant (Oxford, 1890), vol. I, p. 4. T. E. Scrutton maintains that the guild merchant may have originated in London (The Influence of Roman Law in the Law of England (Cambridge, 1885), at p. 55). Carr (op. cit., at p. 176), says of Scrutton's position: "although this statement would probably not find universal acceptance, it is at least improbable that the gilds are a Roman survival."

### 22W. R. Scott, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 3-8.


THE ORIGIN OF THE JOINT-STOCK COMPANY 85 He classifies his subject in "proper, factorage and company accompts". It is the third section which reveals the common practice of trading by a separate joint body within the regulated form. When Dafforne speaks of "company", he uses this phrase in a non-technical meaning, just as we might use the expression "trading in common". Some examples taken from Dafforne will indicate what he means by referring to these "companies":
(a) Voyage to Amsterdam, consigned to Simmon Slodder, being in Company
2/3 for Partner, and 1/3 for me.
(b) Jacob Symonson, according to my order, hath remitted to Arthur Mumperson
at Danisick, Florines 1722. 20 gros. to run upon exchange between the said Arthur, and me Y2 gain, and losse etc.

(c) Voyage to Lisborn, consigned to Diego del Varino: being in company 3/5
Randoll Rice, and 2/5 for me debitor to Randoll Rice his account currant

### ? 566.13.4 D for 100. double Sayes, shipt thither in the White Lion, Mr.

Jonas Jackson to be sold for our account, cost him ready money, with all charges abroad, etc."3 Trading to the places mentioned in these examples was reserved to some of the regulated companies to which Dafforne had dedicated his book. Thus, the trade with Amsterdam was the monopoly of the Merchant Adventurers, and that with Danzig was the privilege of the Eastlanders. Persons, who without being members traded to these places, were regarded as interlopers. It cannot be supposed that Dafforne, after having dedicated his book solemnly to the companies, intended to advise interlopers how to infringe the most valuable right of those to whom the book was dedicated. Consequently, the associations which Dafforne mentions were sub-organizations within the body of the regulated company. Malynes knows two kinds of these associations which he calls "partnership", namely "partnership by contract" and "partnership by imployment". The first comes into existence between Merchants of their own authority, joyning themselves together for to deale and trade either for yeares or voyages; And this is properly called Partnership, where one man doth adventure a thousand pounds, another five hundred pounds, another three hundred pounds, and another foure hundred pounds, more or lesse as they agree amongst themselves to make a stock, every man to have his profit, or to bear losses and adventure according to their several stocks in one and many voyages for one or more yeares, besides the monies taken up at use to trade withall, proportionally according to the rates of their stocks by parts and portions to be divided into so many parts as they agree.38

### 37Dafforne, The Merchants Mirrour (ed. 3, 1660), p. 39, nos. 174 f. The

86 THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LAW JOURNAL The second kind of partnership which Malynes mentions is a kind of commenda, where one factor abroad employs the money of different merchants for the purchase of a common stock of goods. We have now to ascertain the exact structural character of this type of sub-organization. Firstly, the use of the expression "partnership" by Malynes is without significance. It finds an explanation in the fact that neither the Roman" nor the civil law knew of a joint-stock company and that the partnership was the nearest Roman form which the learned civilians, from whom Malynes had borrowed so freely, could apply to that product of medieval practice. It is, on the other hand, noteworthy that Dafforne, who uses the commercial terminology rather than the legal one, calls them "companies", although this term had not yet acquired a technical meaning. Secondly, the associations of merchants within the body of the regulated form differed considerably from the classical Roman societas. The latter was strictly individualistic.40 It was based on a contract of the consensus type. It would be dissolved at any time. It did not operate in rem. The partnership referred to by Malynes presupposed the common membership of a trading body in the person of all partners. It was concluded "for years and voyages", and the members agreed to make "a stock". The common "venture" was a Schicksalsgemeinschaft, an association for good or bad, clearly distinguished from the contractual type. The latter is best exemplified by the abstract form of the societas negotiationis.41 The points, which today are considered as the distinguishing features of the partnership and the joint-stock company, are not of essential importance for this type of sub-organization. It is usually said that the distinctions between the partnership and the joint-stock company are that the joint-stock company is a corporation and that it is characterized by limited liability. 39W. W. Buckland and A. D. McNair, Roman Law and Common Law: A Comparison in Outline (Cambridge, 1936), at p. 229. There is no direct evidence that the Roman societas vegtigalium (lib. lvi, lib. xii, lib. viii, 2) is the root of the medieval development. However, the structure of the societas vegtigalium and of the Italian compera shows many similarities. The parts of the Digest and of the Codex, as well as parts of the Codex Theodosianus, on these tax-collecting societies, were reproduced in many medieval collections (e.g., lex Romana Visigotorum). On the other hand, no author can find traces, as Endemann remarks (Studien in der Romanisch-Kanonistischen Wirtschafts-und Rechtslehre (1874), vol. I, at p. 375) of these tax-collecting societies in the medieval practice. 40F. Schultz, Rbmisches Recht (Miinchen, 1934), at p. 101. 41In this connexion it may be mentioned that the German partnership also diverges considerably from the Roman type in compliance with modern needs (Sohm,

### Institutionen (ed. 16, 1920), p. 552).


92 THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LAW JOURNAL joint-stock developed, namely the Greenland Company which is mentioned by Sir Josiah Child in his New Discourse of Trade (about 1670).84 (5) The view that the joint-stock company developed from the regulated type is corroborated by the following considerations: Almost at the same time when the joint-stock emerged, there took place the dispute on monopolies which finally led to the statute of 1623. Malynes, when dealing with the various suggestions put forward in this connexion, says: Others make a difference between Companies or Associations, dealing in a joynt stoke or apart; affirming the negotiation of a joint stock to be within the compasse of a Monopoly: neverthelesse they would be contended to tolerate the same for the imployment outward. But for the returnes homeward they would have a division in kind or species, of the commodities which they receive: which is contrary to the manner of the Portugals, whose experience hath made apparent into us, that they have for many yeares sold their spices and other East-India commodities with good order and reputation for their benefit.65

### The reformers to whom Malynes refers consider the joint-stock company
apparently as an abuse of the regulated type, and they suggest, quite logically, to reduce it to the form from which it had risen.

### Further, William Sheppard, who had written the earliest special treatise
on corporations (1659), puts the companies on the same level as the guilds, fraternities, and fellowships,66 which were devoted to the promotion of trade. Sheppard's observations permit the conclusion that the constitution of the joint-stock company did not offer any difficulties to the lawyer and fitted in the idea of corporateness to which he was accustomed.67 (6) In summing up the English development, we may say that the joint-stock company is the product of the creative principle of commercial corporateness which, in unbroken continuation, evolved the legal forms for combined trading corresponding to the economic expansion. In particular, the joint-stock company is derived from the practice of forming sub-organizations in the body of the regulated company, and there is no incident which points to the approach from the loan type as was the case on the Italian side. 64Sir J. Child, New Discourse of Trade (ed. 1804), p. 96. 65Malynes, op. cit., at p. 153.

### 66W. Sheppard, Of Corporations, Fraternities and Guilds (1659), at p. 5.


THE ORIGIN OF THE JOINT-STOCK COMPANY 93 IV The object of this study has been so far to examine the origin of the joint-stock principle in England. The result at which we have arrived permits, however, of some generalization, as may be seen from the study of the subsequent development on the continent. (1) On the continent, the first joint-stock company of the modern type was the Dutch East India Company (1602). "At the dawn of the 17th century, there rises like a meteor the great Dutch East India Company, the model for other companies in Holland, structurally totally different from those montes which, according to the leading doctrine, embody the germ of the joint-stock company."08 France followed the Dutch example in 1604, Sweden in 1615, Denmark in 1616, and the Electorate of Brandenburg in

1651. The preamble of a much later French statute (1664) on the reorganization of the French India Company refers to the Dutch neighbours.69 The fact that all modern joint-stock companies on the continent
are modelled on the Dutch example, simplifies the inquiry: If we can trace the origin of the Dutch East India Company, we shall have found the key for the subsequent development on the continent. (2) We resort, again, to the method of analysing the structural situation. The preamble to the Octroi of the Dutch East India Company of 1602 says, inter alia: whereas in the last ten years some of the foremost merchants have formed "companies" in the city of Amsterdam which have undertaken a promising trade to the East Indies; and whereas different other merchants in Zealand, on the Maas, in North Holland and in West Friesland have been induced to form similar "companies"; and whereas the government has considered it in the best of the United Provinces and their good citizens that the trade were to be brought under a good general order, policy, correspondence and community (gemeenschap), it is provided that these companies are united and that the said adventure is done under a fixed unity government and policy.70

### This preamble reveals already the structural character of the Dutch East

### India Company. It was a compulsory shipping cartel, initiated at the
instance of the state, which consisted of a number of smaller companies. 68Lehmann, op. cit., p. 7. 69p. Bornier, Conferences des Ordonnances de Louis XIV (ed. 1755), pp. 476-7. The preamble runs as follows: " . .. .tant certain et par le raisonnement ordinaire et naturel et par 1'experience de nos voisins que le profit surpasse infinitement la peine et le travail .... "

### 70Lehmann, op. cit., pp. 29-30.


96 THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LAW JOURNAL Holland. This view appears to be confirmed by the close commercial intercourse between England and Holland in consequence of the wool trade, by the common religious and political interests of the two countries, and by the great public and secret support which queen Elizabeth extended to the

### United Provinces. In particular, this assumption would appear to be
supported by the fact that the English and the Dutch East India Companies were keen competitors, that the English association was formed with the view of winning the race against the Dutch, and that the English company was incorporated two years before the Dutch came into existence. Finally, there is a possibility that the associations preceding the Dutch East India Company were sub-organizations of the second type in the body of local combinations similar to the English regulated form. This would imply that the joint-stock idea owes again its emergence to the coincidence of those two sets of facts which we have met on the English side: viz., the existence of a great commercial corporation and of unincorporated associations which by their peculiar trading evolved the limited liability and finally supplanted all other constitutional incidents of the mother corporation. This view finds support in the fact that in those days England and Holland formed part of the same economic unit, at least as far as foreign trade was concerned, and that similar economic conditions are bound to produce a similar legal result. It matters little whether we consider the Dutch development as the direct continuation of the English line, or, what seems to be the preferable view, whether we assume, in accordance with the latter explanation, that this is a question of purely municipal character. In either case, the joint-stock company is a product of the creative principle of commercial corporateness which was active in the northern countries and which never failed to keep pace with the progress of the economic development. M. SCHMITTHOFF

### The Temple.
