CNY17 .................................................................
APPELLANT;
APPLICANT,

AND

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
BORDER PROTECTION AND
ANOTHER ...................................................
RESPONDENTS.
RESPONDENTS,

[2019] HCA 50

ON APPEAL FROM THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA

Immigration — Refugees — Immigration Assessment Authority — Application
for protection visa by “fast track applicant” — Review of decision to
refuse to grant protection visa — Secretary of Department required to
give to Authority material considered to be relevant to review — Authority
required to consider material given by Secretary — Where Secretary gave
irrelevant and prejudicial material to Authority — Whether jurisdictional
error — Whether apprehended bias — Migration Act 1958 (Cth), Pt 7AA,
ss 473CB(1)(c), 473DB(1).

Administrative Law (Cth) — Procedural fairness — Bias — Reasonable
apprehension of bias — Review by Immigration Assessment Authority of
decision to refuse to grant protection visa — Secretary of Department
gave information to Authority that was irrelevant to review and
prejudicial
to
applicant
—
Whether
fair-minded
observer
might
reasonably apprehend that Authority might not bring an impartial mind to
resolution of review.

Part 7AA of the Migration Act 1958 (Cth) provided for the review by
the Immigration Assessment Authority of a “fast track reviewable
decision”, which was relevantly deﬁned as certain decisions to refuse to
grant a protection visa to a “fast track applicant”. Under s 473CB(1), the
Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Border Protection was
required to give to the Authority speciﬁed review material, including any
material that was in the Secretary’s possession or control and was
considered by the Secretary (at the time the decision was referred to the
Authority) to be relevant to the review. Section 473DB(1) provided that
the Authority must review a fast track reviewable decision by considering
the review material provided by the Secretary, without accepting or
requesting new information and without interviewing the referred
applicant, subject to the Authority’s power to get new information and to
consider new information if it was satisﬁed there were exceptional
circumstances to justify its consideration.

A non-citizen applied for a protection visa as a fast track applicant. The
application was refused by a delegate of the Minister on the basis that the

HC of A
2019

Oct 16;
Dec 13
2019

Kiefel CJ,
Gageler,
Nettle,
Gordon and
Edelman JJ

76
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

applicant was not a person in respect of whom Australia had protection
obligations. After the decision was referred to the Authority under
s 473CA, the Secretary provided to the Authority the review material in
relation to the decision under s 473CB. The review material provided to
the Authority included material that was irrelevant to the Authority’s
review task and was prejudicial to the applicant. In addition to facts
concerning offences or alleged offences of which the applicant had been
convicted or charged (and which had been disclosed by the applicant in
his application for a protection visa), the material included assertions that
the applicant had a history of unspeciﬁed aggressive or challenging
behaviour, had been involved in many unspeciﬁed incidents while in
detention, had some link to investigations of a “riot” and was himself the
subject of investigations for unspeciﬁed matters, had been of interest to
“Det Intel”, and had been refused bridging visas in the past. The Authority
affirmed the delegate’s refusal to grant the protection visa. The statement
of reasons stated that the Authority had regard to the material referred by
the Secretary, but did not make any reference to the irrelevant and
prejudicial material.

Held, by Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ, Kiefel CJ and Gageler J
dissenting, that a hypothetical fair-minded lay observer with knowledge of
the material objective facts might reasonably have apprehended that the
Authority might not have brought an impartial mind to the resolution of
the review, by reason of the irrelevant and prejudicial material which it
was mandated to consider.

Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337; Isbester v

Knox City Council (2015) 255 CLR 135; and Webb v The Queen (1994)
181 CLR 41, applied.

Per Nettle and Gordon JJ. A fair-minded lay observer might have
apprehended that the irrelevant and prejudicial material might have led the
decision-maker to make a decision otherwise than on the legal and factual
merits of the case because it might have led the decision-maker to the
view, even if subconscious, that the applicant was not the sort of person
who should be granted a visa or was not a person who should be believed.

Per Edelman J. In circumstances where the Authority did not suggest
that the irrelevant and prejudicial material that it had considered had been
disregarded or had been given no weight, a fair-minded lay observer
might apprehend that the Authority might have formed adverse views of
the applicant’s character and, consciously or subconsciously, might have
acted upon those adverse views when reaching conclusions on the issues
in dispute either directly, or indirectly by the effect on its assessment of
the credibility of the applicant.

Held further, by Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Edelman JJ, Nettle and
Gordon JJ not deciding, that, by giving to the Authority material that
could not reasonably have been considered to be relevant to the review,
the Secretary failed to comply with s 473CB(1)(c) of the Migration Act.

77
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

Decision of the Federal Court of Australia (Full Court): CNY17 v
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264 FCR 87,
reversed.

APPEAL from the Federal Court of Australia.
On 13 August 2013, a Faili Kurd from Iraq (CNY17) arrived in
Australia and was detained on Christmas Island. While in detention, he
was convicted of an offence of intentionally destroying or damaging
Commonwealth property arising from an incident in March 2015, and
was charged with spitting at a guard and breaking a window during
protests that took place on Christmas Island in November 2015. On
16 September 2016, CNY17 lodged an application for a safe haven
enterprise visa. On 14 March 2017, the visa application was refused by
a delegate of the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection on
the grounds that CNY17 was not a person in respect of whom Australia
had
protection
obligations.
The
decision
was
referred
to
the
Immigration Assessment Authority pursuant to s 473CA of the
Migration Act 1958 (Cth). The review material given to the Authority
by the Secretary in purported compliance with s 473CB(1)(c) included
48 pages of documents comprising material in relation to the
prosecution against CNY17, copies of emails between officers of the
Department and between the Department and “WA Compliance Courts
Prisons” concerning the custody and management of CNY17 during
the period from November 2015 to March 2016, and a departmental
“Case Review” in relation to CNY17 dated March 2016. The material
included departmental documents that made a range of assertions about
CNY17 and his behaviour. CNY17 was not provided with copies of the
documents. On 12 May 2017, the Authority affirmed the delegate’s
decision to refuse to grant the visa, stating that it had regard to the
material referred by the Secretary under s 473CB of the Migration Act.
CNY17 applied for judicial review in the Federal Circuit Court. On
8 November 2017, the Federal Circuit Court (Judge Street) dismissed
the application. On 21 September 2018, an appeal by CNY17 to the
Federal Court was dismissed by majority (Moshinsky and Thawley JJ,
Mortimer J dissenting). On 17 May 2019, Kiefel CJ and Edelman J
granted CNY17 special leave to appeal to the High Court.
L G De Ferrari SC (with her M W Guo), for the appellant. The
Authority had regard to the extraneous material; it was under a duty to
consider the review material. The extraneous materials were irrelevant,
and were clearly prejudicial. The judges below differed on the degree
to which materials had to be prejudicial before a reasonable
apprehension of bias would arise. We say that the materials are either
prejudicial
or
not.
The
test
in
Ebner
v
Offıcial
Trustee
in

78
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

Bankruptcy (1) – that is, reasonable apprehension of bias as an
objective possibility, not probability – applies in all contexts. Even
with a professional decision-maker, like an employee of the public
service who was assigned to the Authority, the risk of subconscious,
prejudicial effect cannot be ruled out. [KIEFEL CJ. Could you
summarise what the extraneous material conveys that was not
conveyed by the information provided by the appellant in his
application?] That he was persistently involved in incidents while in
detention, difficult to manage in his behaviour and someone that has to
be kept in detention in jail instead of migration detention.

There are implications ordinarily drawn that condition the exercise
of a statutory power: the two rules of common law natural justice.
Section 473DA(1) precludes an implication being drawn that relates to
the hearing rule. However, there is the implication of the bias rule. The
content of the bias rule must accommodate the statutory framework
and the particular factual context of a particular exercise of power (2).
Here, the Authority could have permitted the appellant to comment on
prejudicial information that was not known by him to exist, and that
was not known by him to have been provided to the Authority.
[NETTLE J. That sounds more like the hearing rule than the bias rule.]
In a sense, the two rules are two sides of the same coin. The test for
apprehended bias, explained in Ebner and Isbester v Knox City
Council (3), consists of two steps. The ﬁrst is identiﬁcation of what it
is said may lead the decision-maker to decide the case other than on its
merits. The second is the “connection” between that matter and the
feared deviation from a proper decision-making process, namely, the
effect on the Authority, even if only subconscious, in respect to
whether the appellant should be believed, which is a central issue in
protection visa cases. [GAGELER J. What is the subconscious effect of
the extraneous materials?] The fact that he is suspected of more serious
offences outside Australia, or intelligence considerations or national
security
issues.
We
do
not
know
what
the
references
mean.
[EDELMAN J. You say that is the core relevance of the failure to seek
comment from the parties, because, without any invitation for
comment or clariﬁcation of these matters, there remains these lurking
allegations.] Yes, combined with the fact that it is considered by the
Secretary to be relevant and that it should be conveyed to the
Authority. When the material is prejudicial, the “connection” required

(1)
(2000) 205 CLR 337.
(2)
Stollery v Greyhound Racing Control Board (1972) 128 CLR 509 at 519 per
Barwick CJ.
(3)
(2015) 255 CLR 135.

79
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

is obvious (4). Reasonableness of the apprehension is there precisely to
rule out an inquiry into the actual state of mind of the decision-maker.

Finally, there is an implied condition on the exercise by the
Secretary of the duty and power under s 473CB to reach the conclusion
that material is relevant to the review, namely that the state of mind be
formed reasonably and on a correct understanding of law. In this case,
on a correct understanding of the law, the materials could never have
been relevant.

G R Kennett SC (with him A P Yuile), for the ﬁrst respondent. In
Webb and Re JRL; Ex parte CJL (5), the concept of extraneous
material
appears
to
be
information
that
has
come
before
the
decision-maker in some way that is improper or outside the statutory
process. [GORDON J. Is it limited to those categories?] We would say it
is. The problem here is not so much that the Authority got to see this
material because the Authority also got to see what was in the
appellant’s visa application. The problem is that the appellant did not
know, and that is a hearing rule issue. [NETTLE J. No, it is not. It is the
possibility that the Authority might have taken this irrelevant material
into account.] That is the way it is framed by the appellant. It is an
arresting feature of the statutory scheme that the material that is given
to the Authority could conceivably be used in a decision, and the
person whose interests are at stake may never get to know about it until
the decision is made, or perhaps not even then. But that cannot be
complained about because of s 473DA. Not much can be taken from
the Authority’s statement of reasons. It is a question of whether the
process was fair and appeared to be fair; what the decision maker says
about his or her reasoning later is unlikely to be useful in resolving
those questions. Reasons that are published at the end of the process
are not relevant to questions in relation to apprehended bias (6).
[GAGELER J. Can the content of the reasons can be probative of the
position before they were given?] Yes, in principle, although it is
difficult to think of an example of that occurring in an apprehended
bias situation. The two-step test adopted by the majority in Isbester is,
ﬁrst, identiﬁcation of what might lead the decision-maker to decide the
case other than on its merits, and, second, the logical connection
between that interest and the feared deviation from the course of
deciding the case on its merits. The hypothetical fair-minded observer

(4)
Webb v The Queen (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 53 per Mason CJ and McHugh J.
(5)
(1986) 161 CLR 342.
(6)
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls (2011) 244 CLR 427.

80
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

is to be taken to be aware of the nature of the decision and the context
in which it was made. The hypothetical observer is not alarmed by
mere theoretical possibilities. The contents of the documents that
comprise the extraneous materials is largely factual. Factual material
cannot be prejudicial. The extraneous material here comes from the
Secretary with an implicit representation that it is thought to be
relevant. Two things should be borne in mind. First, the Secretary’s
power is delegable, and there is no evidence in this case about who
actually exercised the power. A fair-minded lay observer who
understands the statutory scheme would understand that the power is
delegable and is intended to be exercised as soon as practicable.
Second, the Authority must make up its own mind about the merits of
particular cases and there is no reason why it should give special
respect to the opinion of the Secretary or his delegate as to what
material
is
or
is
not
relevant.
The Authority
is
a
specialist
administrative body established to make decisions of this kind, and is
to be distinguished in that sense from a body of lay people. Because
the Authority is required by s 473DB to consider the review material,
the Authority is already compelled to consider potentially irrelevant or
prejudicial material. The appellant was required to disclose his
conviction, and he did so. The relevance of particular material in every
case must be a function of the substantive issues that the Authority has
to decide. The statute assumes a capacity in the members of the
Authority to put aside irrelevant material.

The Authority had speciﬁc and deﬁned issues to determine, which do
not include any element about character or any discretionary judgment
about whether an applicant is desirable. In the eyes of the hypothetical
fair-minded observer, there is not a great deal of scope for the
Authority to be swayed in its decision-making by a perception of bad
character, and to be so swayed would be an error of law quite apart
from any question of bias. [GORDON J. That is looking at outcome, is it
not, rather than process?] It is looking forward to the outcome, but it is
the fair-minded lay observer speculating about the nature of this
decision-making body and the likelihood of it being swayed by
prejudicial material. The Authority is under a duty to provide reasons.
The discipline of having to articulate ﬁndings of fact and to identify a
basis for them detracts from the practical likelihood of the member
being diverted, subconsciously or otherwise, by a piece of irrelevant
material. The fair-minded observer knows that about the Authority.

L G De Ferrari SC, in reply.

The second defendant entered a submitting appearance.

Cur adv vult

81
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

13 December 2019

The following written judgments were delivered: —

KIEFEL CJ AND GAGELER J. This appeal from a decision of the Full
Court of the Federal Court (7) concerns a problem that has arisen in the
administration of Pt 7AA of the Migration Act 1958 (Cth).

The statutory scheme
Part 7AA of the Migration Act, the scheme of which has been noted
in this Court on previous occasions (8), imposes a requirement for
automatic merits review by the Immigration Assessment Authority of
decisions of the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
referred to as “fast track reviewable decisions”. Fast track reviewable
decisions include certain decisions to refuse protection visas on the
basis that the Minister is not satisﬁed that the applicants meet the main
statutory criterion for the grant of protection visas, that they are
persons in respect of whom Australia owes protection obligations (9).
The Part establishes the Authority within the Migration and Refugee
Division of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (10). The Authority as
so established is to consist of the President of the Tribunal and the
Division head (11), each of whom must hold appointment for a ﬁxed
term under the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975 (Cth) (12),
together with a Senior Reviewer and other Reviewers (13), each of
whom are to be persons engaged under the Public Service Act 1999
(Cth) (14).
The requirement which the Part imposes for automatic review by the
Authority of a fast track reviewable decision is achieved through the
imposition of three cumulative and consecutive statutory duties. The
Minister has a duty to refer a fast track reviewable decision to the
Authority as soon as reasonably practicable after the decision is
made (15). The Secretary of the Department of Immigration and
Border Protection then has a duty to give speciﬁed “review material”
to the Authority at the same time as, or as soon as reasonably

(7)
CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264 FCR 87.
(8)
Plaintiff M174/2016 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264
CLR 217 at 225-232 [13]-[38]; BVD17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection (2019) 268 CLR 29 at 35-39 [3]-[17].
(9)
Sections 5(1) (deﬁnition of “fast track decision”), 36, 65 and 473BB (deﬁnition of
“fast track reviewable decision”) of the Migration Act.
(10)
Section 473JA(1) of the Migration Act.
(11)
Section 473JA(2)(a) and (aa) of the Migration Act.
(12)
Section 8, read with ss 6 and 17K.
(13)
Section 473JA(2)(b) of the Migration Act.
(14)
Section 473JE(1) of the Migration Act.
(15)
Section 473CA of the Migration Act.

82
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

1

2

3

4

practicable after, the decision is referred to the Authority (16). The
Authority then has a duty to “review” the referred decision (17) and to
do so “by considering the review material” provided to it by the
Secretary without accepting or requesting new information and without
interviewing the referred applicant (18). That requirement for the
Authority to conduct the review by considering the review material
provided to it by the Secretary is expressly made subject to other
provisions within the Part which confer power on the Authority to
get (19)
and
in
speciﬁed
circumstances
to
consider (20)
“new
information”, being information which was not before the Minister
when making the referred decision and which the Authority considers
may be relevant.
The review material which the Secretary has a duty to give to the
Authority is speciﬁed to include a statement that sets out the ﬁndings
of fact made by the person who made the fast track reviewable
decision, that refers to the evidence on which those ﬁndings were
based, and that gives the reasons for the decision (21), together with all
material provided by the referred applicant to the Minister before the
fast track reviewable decision was made (22).
By operation of s 473CB(1)(c), the review material which it is the
duty of the Secretary to give to the Authority also includes “any other
material that is in the Secretary’s possession or control and is
considered by the Secretary (at the time the decision is referred to the
Authority) to be relevant to the review”. To consider material that is in
the Secretary’s possession or control to be relevant to the review
within the meaning of the provision, the Secretary (who can be
expected ordinarily to act through a delegate (23)) obviously needs to
form the opinion that the material is capable directly or indirectly of
rationally affecting assessment of the probability of the existence of
some fact about which the Authority might be required to make a
ﬁnding in the conduct of its review of the referred decision.
Compliance with the duty to provide such material to the Authority
accordingly necessitates that the Secretary or delegate of the Secretary
turn his or her mind to the range of material that is in the Secretary’s
possession or control which pertains to the referred applicant in order

(16)
Section 473CB of the Migration Act.
(17)
Section 473CC(1) of the Migration Act.
(18)
Section 473DB(1) of the Migration Act.
(19)
Section 473DC of the Migration Act.
(20)
Section 473DD of the Migration Act.
(21)
Section 473CB(1)(a) of the Migration Act.
(22)
Section 473CB(1)(b) of the Migration Act.
(23)
Section 496(2) of the Migration Act and s 34AB of the Acts Interpretation Act
1901 (Cth).

83
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J

5

6

to determine whether or not to form that opinion in relation to the
whole or some part of that material. The opinion of the Secretary that
material is relevant to the review (so as to be required to be given to
the Authority) or is not relevant to the review (so as not to be required
to be given to the Authority) must be formed reasonably and on a
correct understanding of the law (24).
The requirement for the Authority then to consider the review
material that is given to it by the Secretary is not a requirement for the
Authority to adopt the Secretary’s opinion of the relevance of the
review material to the review of the merits of the referred decision that
it is the duty of the Authority to conduct. The requirement is no more
than that the Authority examine the review material provided to it by
the Secretary in order for the Authority to form and act on its own
assessment of the relevance of that material to the review of the
referred decision. Within the bounds of reasonableness, it is open to the
Authority to assess review material as probative of an issue of fact
arising in the review, and give that material such weight as it thinks the
material deserves in making the decision on the review. Alternatively,
it is open to the Authority to assess review material as wholly
irrelevant to the review and place no reliance at all on that material in
making its decision on the review. What the Authority cannot do is to
fail or refuse to turn its attention to any of the review material that is
given to it by the Secretary.
To the extent that the Authority treats review material as a basis for
making a ﬁnding of fact that forms part of the reason for the decision
that it makes on the review, the Authority is obliged to identify that
material in the written statement of reasons that it is required to give
for the decision (25) as evidence on which that ﬁnding is based (26).

The nature of the problem
The problem with which the appeal is concerned arises in the
following apparently not-uncommon scenario.
In purported compliance with s 473CB(1)(c), a delegate of the
Secretary gives to the Authority a large amount of material contained
on a departmental ﬁle relating to the referred applicant. Some of the
material which the Secretary gives to the Authority is not capable of
rationally affecting assessment of the probability of the existence of
any fact about which the Authority needs to make a ﬁnding in
reviewing
the
referred
decision.
That
material
is
nevertheless
prejudicial to the referred applicant in the sense that the material might

(24)
Graham v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2017) 263 CLR 1 at
30 [57].
(25)
Section 473EA(1)(b) of the Migration Act.
(26)
Section 25D of the Acts Interpretation Act.

84
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

7

8

9

10

be argued to be capable of founding an inference that the referred
applicant is a person of bad character or might be interpreted as
indicating that the referred applicant is a person who, in the view of the
Secretary or of one or more officers of the Department, has been shown
by his or her conduct or associations to be a person unworthy of being
granted permission to remain in Australia.
Without requesting new information and without interviewing the
referred applicant, the Authority conducts a review which results in the
Authority making a decision affirming the decision to refuse the
referred
applicant
a
protection
visa.
Unsurprisingly,
given
the
irrelevance of that material to the review, the Authority’s written
statement of reasons makes no reference to the irrelevant but
prejudicial material given to it by the Secretary.

The consequences of the problem for the decision of the
Authority
The absence of reference to material in the Authority’s written
statement of reasons will ordinarily support the inference that the
material was not intentionally relied on by the Authority in reaching its
decision on the review (27). Where that inference is appropriate to be
drawn in relation to irrelevant but prejudicial material given to the
Authority by the Secretary, the decision of the Authority will not be
open to challenge on the basis that the Authority has reached the
decision taking into account an irrelevant consideration.
The Secretary’s giving of the irrelevant but prejudicial material to
the Authority nevertheless has potential to result in the decision-
making of the Authority having transgressed either or both of two
distinct limitations which Pt 7AA imposes on its jurisdiction. One is
failure of a precondition to the exercise of the jurisdiction of the
Authority to conduct a review. The other is non-compliance with the
need for the Authority to avoid any appearance of bias.
The ﬁrst of those potentially operative procedural limitations on the
jurisdiction of the Authority is inherent in the structure of Pt 7AA. That
structure makes compliance by the Secretary with the duty to give the
speciﬁed review material to the Authority, including the review
material speciﬁed in s 473CB(1)(c), a precondition to the Authority
exercising jurisdiction to review the fast track reviewable decision that
has been referred to it by the Minister. To the extent that material given
by the Secretary to the Authority in purported compliance with that
duty is material which the Secretary at the time of referral could not
reasonably have considered capable of rationally affecting assessment

(27)
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZMTA (2019) 264 CLR 421 at
445 [47].

85
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J

11

12

13

14

of the probability of the existence of some fact about which the
Authority might be required to make a ﬁnding in reviewing the
referred decision, the giving of that material to the Authority by the
Secretary is not compliant with that duty (28).
For the purpose of determining whether or not that precondition to
the exercising of the Authority’s jurisdiction to review a referred
decision is met, no meaningful distinction can be drawn between
under-compliance and over-compliance with the Secretary’s duty. The
legislative contemplation is that the Authority is to receive from the
Secretary the totality of the statutorily speciﬁed review material and
that the Authority is not to receive any other information about the
referred applicant from the Secretary unless and until the Authority
chooses to exercise its speciﬁc power to get new information.
Consistently with repeatedly articulated interpretative principle (29),
however, the precondition to the Authority exercising jurisdiction is not
to be interpreted so rigidly as to result in the invalidity of the
Authority’s decision where the non-compliance that occurred is
immaterial to the decision of the Authority in the sense that the
non-compliance could not realistically have made any difference to the
decision.
The second of the potentially operative procedural limitations on the
jurisdiction of the Authority is implied into the scheme of Pt 7AA by
the common law. The operative common law principle of statutory
interpretation is that observance of procedural fairness is an implied
condition of the exercise of jurisdiction by “every one who decides
anything” (30) pursuant to statute to affect the interests of an individual
by force of the statute, unless and to the extent that procedural fairness
is clearly excluded by the statutory scheme (31). One aspect of
procedural fairness – the hearing rule – must be taken to be exhausted
by those provisions within Pt 7AA that are expressed to make
exhaustive provision as to the natural justice hearing rule in the
conduct of the review (32). The other aspect of procedural fairness –

(28)
cf Avon Downs Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1949) 78 CLR 353 at
360.
(29)
Wei v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2015) 257 CLR 22 at 32
[23], 33-34 [26]-[28]; Hossain v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2018) 264 CLR 123 at 133-134 [27]-[29]; Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZMTA (2019) 264 CLR 421 at 444-445 [44]-[45], 452-453 [72].
(30)
Board of Education v Rice [1911] AC 179 at 182, quoted in Kioa v West (1985)
159 CLR 550 at 584.
(31)
Plaintiff S10/2011 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (2012) 246 CLR 636
at 658-659 [66], 666-668 [97]-[100].
(32)
Section 473DA(1) of the Migration Act. See BVD17 v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection (2019) 268 CLR 29 at 42-44 [29]-[34].

86
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

15

16

the bias rule – is unconﬁned by any provision of Pt 7AA. The fullness
of its common law vigour is acknowledged in the terms of the express
statutory exhortation (33) that in carrying out its functions the
Authority “is to pursue the objective of providing a mechanism of
limited review” that is, amongst other things, “free of bias” (34).
What the bias rule requires of the Authority is that its conduct and
that of the Minister and the Secretary is never such that a fair-minded
lay observer properly informed as to the nature of the procedure for
which Pt 7AA provides might reasonably apprehend that the Authority
might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of
the factual and legal questions that arise for its decision in the conduct
of a review. That adaptation to the scheme of Pt 7AA of the standard
formulation of the bias rule (35) has a number of elements which
warrant further exposition.
The purpose of combining the “double might” (36) with the
construct of the hypothetical “fair-minded lay observer” is to stress that
the bias rule is concerned as much to preserve the public appearance of
“independence and impartiality” (37) on the part of the Authority as it
is to preserve the actuality. The requisite independence is decisional
independence, most importantly from inﬂuence by the Secretary or the
Minister. The requisite impartiality is objectivity in the ﬁnding of facts,
in the exercise of procedural discretions, and in the application of the
applicable legislated criteria for the grant or refusal of a protection
visa.
The purpose of combining the “fair-mindedness” of the hypothetical
lay observer with the “reasonableness” of that observer’s apprehension
is to stress that the appearance or non-appearance of independence and
impartiality on the part of the Authority falls to be determined from the
perspective of a member of the public who is “neither complacent nor
unduly sensitive or suspicious” (38). Together they emphasise that “the
conﬁdence with which the [Authority] and its decisions ought to be
regarded and received may be undermined, as much as may conﬁdence

(33)
cf Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li (2013) 249 CLR 332 at 342 [12],
373 [98].
(34)
Section 473FA(1) of the Migration Act.
(35)
Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 344 [6]; Re Refugee
Review Tribunal; Ex parte H (2001) 75 ALJR 982 at 989-990 [27]-[28]; 179 ALR
425 at 434-435.
(36)
Islam v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (2009) 51 AAR 147 at 154-155
[32].
(37)
cf Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [7].
(38)
Johnson v Johnson (2000) 201 CLR 488 at 509 [53].

87
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J

17

18

19

in the courts of law, by a suspicion of bias reasonably – and not
fancifully – entertained by responsible minds” (39).
The question whether conduct has resulted in a breach of the bias
rule falls to be determined in light of the totality of the circumstances
that exist at the time when that question arises (40). Where the question
arises for determination after the Authority has made a decision on a
review, the totality of the circumstances includes the decision and the
reasons that the Authority has given for the decision.
Establishment of an apprehension of bias on the part of the
Authority then requires the taking of two essential steps: ﬁrst,
identiﬁcation of the factor which it is postulated might have led the
Authority to have decided the review otherwise than on an independent
and impartial evaluation of the merits; and, second, articulation of how
that factor might have led the Authority to have decided the review
otherwise than on an independent and impartial evaluation of the
merits (41). Taking those two steps is necessary to provide the
foundation for the third and critical step in the application of the bias
rule. That is the step of assessing whether the fair-minded lay observer
might reasonably apprehend in the totality of the circumstances that the
articulated departure might have occurred (42). In taking that third
step, “it is the court’s view of the public’s view, not the court’s own
view, which is determinative” (43).
Stepping through that analysis in respect of the conduct of the
Secretary in having given irrelevant but prejudicial material to the
Authority allows for the recognition of two quite distinct ways in
which
the
material
might
conceivably
be
apprehended
by
the
fair-minded lay observer to have compromised the independence or
impartiality of the Authority in the conduct of the review.
To the extent that the fair-minded lay observer might interpret the
material as a communication to the Authority of the opinion of the
Secretary about the character of the referred applicant or about the
worthiness of the referred applicant to be granted a visa or about the
merits of the decision of the Minister to refuse to grant the referred
applicant a protection visa, the hypothetical fair-minded lay observer
can be expected to be reluctant to discount as unrealistic the possibility

(39)
R v Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission; Ex parte Angliss
Group (1969) 122 CLR 546 at 553.
(40)
Webb v The Queen (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 55, 73-74.
(41)
Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [8]; Michael
Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls (2011) 244 CLR 427 at 445 [63]; Isbester v
Knox City Council (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [21].
(42)
Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [8]; Isbester v
Knox City Council (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 155-156 [59].
(43)
Webb v The Queen (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 52.

88
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

20

21

22

23

that the Authority might have been inﬂuenced by that communication.
The fair-minded lay observer would expect the Authority and the
Secretary to adhere scrupulously to the standard expected of a court
and court officer (44) of avoiding any private communication of
opinion pertaining to the review and would view any departure from
that standard with justiﬁable suspicion.
The general concern about private communications to decision-
making bodies was expressed some 30 years ago (45):
“Citizens are generally aware that it is the accepted practice that
no party or representative of a party should have a private
communication with a judge or a member of a tribunal who is to
hear a case. The mere knowledge that there had been an undisclosed
departure from that proper practice would have tended to produce
doubts and reduce conﬁdence in the member of the tribunal who
presided at the hearing. People would be inclined to wonder why
the breach of practice had occurred and how far it had gone.”
Within the cloistered and non-adversarial context of Pt 7AA, there is
a structural consideration which makes that general concern more
acute. It is the marked discrepancy in hierarchical position between the
Secretary, on the one hand, and a Reviewer engaged under the Public
Service Act, on the other. That discrepancy would make any
communication from the Secretary to the Authority that might smack
of instruction, advice or opinion concerning the conduct or outcome of
a review a matter of grave concern.
To the extent that the fair-minded lay observer might interpret
material given to the Authority by the Secretary not as instruction,
advice or opinion concerning the conduct or outcome of a review but
merely as material capable of founding an inference on the part of the
reader that the referred applicant is a person of bad character or a
person who is in some way (unrelated to the applicable criteria for the
grant of a protection visa) unworthy of being granted permission to
remain in Australia, the hypothetical fair-minded lay observer can be
expected to be more circumspect.
The fair-minded lay observer would again here recognise that an
understanding of the role of the judge within the judicial process has
some analogical application to the role of the Reviewer within the
review process. In relation to the role of the judge within the judicial
process,
she
would
recognise
the
wisdom
of
the
following
observation (46):

(44)
cf Re JRL; Ex parte CJL (1986) 161 CLR 342.
(45)
St Kilda City Council v Evindon Pty Ltd [1990] VR 771 at 777.
(46)
Public Utilities Commission of the District of Columbia v Pollak (1952) 343 US
451 at 466-467.

89
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J

24

25

26

27

“The judicial process demands that a judge move within the
framework of relevant legal rules and the covenanted modes of
thought for ascertaining them. He must think dispassionately and
submerge private feeling on every aspect of a case. There is a good
deal of shallow talk that the judicial robe does not change the man
within it. It does. The fact is that on the whole judges do lay aside
private views in discharging their judicial functions. This is
achieved through training, professional habits, self-discipline and
that fortunate alchemy by which men are loyal to the obligation
with which they are entrusted. But it is also true that reason cannot
control the subconscious inﬂuence of feelings of which it is
unaware. When there is ground for believing that such unconscious
feelings may operate in the ultimate judgment, or may not unfairly
lead others to believe they are operating, judges recuse themselves.
They do not sit in judgment. They do this for a variety of reasons.
The guiding consideration is that the administration of justice
should reasonably appear to be disinterested as well as be so in
fact.”
The fair-minded lay observer would recognise that although the
Authority is not a court and although a Reviewer is not necessarily a
lawyer, the Authority as constituted by a Reviewer is a professional
decision-making body that can ordinarily be expected to be capable of
discarding “the irrelevant, the immaterial and the prejudicial” (47).
But, the fair-minded lay observer must also be taken to recognise that
even a professional decision-maker is not “a passionless thinking
machine” (48) and that information consciously and conscientiously
discarded might still sometimes have a subconscious effect on even the
most professional of decision-making (49).
That last proposition can be illustrated in respect of material given to
the Authority
by
the
Secretary
in
purported
compliance
with
s 473CB(1)(c) by an earlier judgment of the Full Court of the Federal
Court, the correctness of which is not challenged in this appeal (50).
The Full Court there concluded that information contained in material
given to the Authority by the Secretary, which was irrelevant to the
review and to which the Authority made no reference in its reasons for
affirming the decision of a delegate of the Minister to refuse the
referred applicant a protection visa, was so “highly prejudicial” to the

(47)
Johnson v Johnson (2000) 201 CLR 488 at 493 [12], quoting Vakauta v Kelly
(1988) 13 NSWLR 502 at 527. See also R v Leckie; Ex parte Felman (1977) 52
ALJR 155 at 158; 18 ALR 93 at 99.
(48)
In re JP Linahan Inc (1943) 138 F (2d) 650 at 653.
(49)
eg, Livesey v New South Wales Bar Association (1983) 151 CLR 288 at 299-300.
(50)
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v AMA16 (2017) 254 FCR 534.

90
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

28

29

referred applicant that “the fair-minded lay observer, acting reasonably,
would not dismiss the possibility that the [Authority] may have been
affected by [the information] albeit subconsciously” (51). The highly
prejudicial information with which the Full Court was concerned was
information that the referred applicant had been charged with the
commission of a serious sexual assault while in immigration detention.
Although not spelt out in the Full Court’s reasoning, the information
was evidently regarded by the Full Court as so appalling as to give rise
to the reasonable perception that it might play on the subconscious of
the Authority to the detriment of the referred applicant as the Authority
conscientiously sought to evaluate the merits of the referred applicant’s
claims to have met the statutory criteria to be recognised as a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations.

The problem instantiated in the present appeal
The problem arises in the present appeal in the context of the
Minister’s referral to the Authority of a decision of a delegate of the
Minister which refused to grant a protection visa to the appellant, who
arrived in Australia by boat in August 2013. The appellant was
detained in immigration detention on Christmas Island from the time of
his arrival until November 2015 when he was transferred to a
correctional facility in Albany in Western Australia. He applied in
September 2016 for a protection visa, which a delegate of the Minister
refused in March 2017 on the basis that the delegate was not satisﬁed
that the appellant was a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations.
Material which the Secretary indisputably had a duty to give to the
Authority as review material in consequence of the referral, and which
the Secretary in fact gave to the Authority, included the prescribed
form of application for a protection visa which the appellant signed in
August 2016 as well as the statement of reasons which the delegate
gave for refusing that application in March 2017. The appellant’s
answers to standard questions in the prescribed form revealed that he
had in February 2016 been placed on a six month good behaviour bond
for an offence involving the breaking of a window. His answers also
revealed that he had been charged with, and was awaiting trial for,
offences involving spitting at a guard and breaking a window when
still in immigration detention on Christmas Island in November 2015
following the death of a friend there.
The delegate’s reasons for decision also referred to the Febru-
ary 2016 good behaviour bond, being for the offence of intentionally

(51)
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v AMA16 (2017) 254 FCR 534 at
552 [75] (original emphasis).

91
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J

30

31

32

destroying or damaging property belonging to the Commonwealth. The
reasons did so in the context of noting that the appellant’s conviction
for the offence might have been relevant for the delegate to consider in
relation to another criterion for the grant of a protection visa had the
delegate been satisﬁed that the appellant was a person in respect of
whom Australia has protection obligations. The reasons made clear that
the delegate properly did not take the conviction into account in
coming to the decision that he was not so satisﬁed.
The source of the problem is some 48 pages of accompanying
documents which the Secretary gave to the Authority in purported
compliance with s 473CB(1)(c). Those 48 pages comprised formal
letters from officers of the Department to the appellant concerning the
provision to him of assistance in the preparation of his application for
protection, the formal record of the conviction and the order and
recognisance in the Magistrates Court of Western Australia in
February 2016 for the offence of intentionally destroying or damaging
Commonwealth property, a prosecution report to the Department by the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions referring to that
conviction,
copies
of
emails
passing
between
officers
of
the
Department as well as between the Department and “WA Compliance
Courts Prisons” concerning the custody and management of the
appellant during the period from November 2015 to March 2016, and a
departmental “Case Review” in relation to the appellant dated
March 2016.
Nothing in those 48 pages was capable of rationally affecting
assessment of the probability of the existence of any fact about which
the Authority needed to make a ﬁnding in reviewing the delegate’s
decision. Within the email correspondence could be found numerous
statements which referred to the appellant having been transferred from
Christmas Island to the Albany correctional facility following his
participation in events on Christmas Island in November 2015 which
were described sometimes as an “incident” and sometimes as a “riot”.
One of the emails, sent from one departmental officer to another in
January 2016 soon after the transfer of the appellant from Christmas
Island to the Albany correctional facility, offered a “brief background”
to the appellant. Under the heading “Immigration History”, the email
set out a chronology which made reference to numerous events
including references (not otherwise explained in the evidence) to the
appellant having taken part in a peaceful protest in May 2014, to
advice in February 2015 that the appellant was “no longer of interest to
Det Intel”, and to the appellant in March 2015 having participated in
an “interview with National Security Monitoring Section”. Under the
heading “Mental Health”, it referred to then recent “Case Management
observations” of “possible mental health issues”. Under the heading

92
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

33

34

35

“Behaviour”, it referred to the appellant having a history of “aggressive
and/or challenging behaviour” when “engaging with the department”
possibly attributable to frustration from being held in detention or to
mental health issues.
Within
the
departmental
“Case
Review”,
under
the
heading
“Immigration history”, was a similar chronology as had been recorded
under that heading in the January 2016 email. Under the heading
“Barriers to case resolution and actions taken or being taken to resolve
those barriers”, were statements to the effect that the appellant had
been considered on several occasions for release from detention as the
holder of a bridging visa and had been “involved in many incidents
while in detention”. Under the heading “Justiﬁcation of ongoing
detention”, was a statement that a recommendation had been made to
the effect that the appellant remain in the Albany correctional facility
until the Australian Federal Police had ﬁnalised “their [Christmas
Island] riot investigation”.
Why the departmental case officer responsible for selecting the
review material to be given to the Authority on behalf of the Secretary
might have thought it appropriate to include the 48 pages does not
appear from the record on the appeal. In a standard form referral
document completed by the case officer, the pages are listed without
explanation simply by document numbers under the residual category
of “[a]ny other relevant documents that should be included”.
After writing to the appellant informing him that the Minister had
referred the delegate’s decision to refuse him a protection visa to it for
review and that the Department “has provided us with all documents
they consider relevant to your case”, the Authority went on to make a
decision affirming the decision of the delegate without requesting new
information and without interviewing the appellant. The statement of
the Authority’s reasons for affirming the decision of the delegate
expressly states that the Authority “had regard to the material referred
by the Secretary”. The Authority’s reasons make no reference to the
February 2016 conviction or to any events on Christmas Island or to
anything else contained only in the 48 pages.

Is there a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the
Authority?
Plainly, the 48 pages had nothing to do with the merits of the
decision of the Minister to refuse to grant the referred applicant a
protection visa. And plainly, the 48 pages were looked at and were
consciously discarded as irrelevant by the Authority in the course of
undertaking its review.
Differing from the majority in this Court and agreeing with the
majority in the Full Court of the Federal Court in the judgment under

93
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J

36

37

38

39

40

appeal (52), we are unable to conclude that a hypothetical fair-minded
lay observer, acting reasonably, would entertain as realistic the
possibility that looking at anything contained in the 48 pages might in
any way have diverted the Authority from its statutory function of
undertaking an independent and impartial evaluation on the merits of
whether or not the appellant was a person in respect of whom Australia
has protection obligations.
The hypothetical fair-minded lay observer might well wonder why
the 48 pages were included in the material provided to the Authority,
but would recognise that most of the information contained in all of the
pages was information which ﬂeshed out the references to the
conviction and pending charges arising from events on Christmas
Island in March and November 2015 to which the appellant had
referred in his application for a protection visa which was quite
properly given to the Authority. The hypothetical fair-minded lay
observer would understand that, whatever relevance those events and
the information which pertained to them might possibly have had for
the processing of the appellant’s application for the protection visa had
he been found to be a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations, the events and information could have no
legitimate bearing on whether the appellant met the statutory deﬁnition
of a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations and
therefore could have no legitimate bearing on the review to be
conducted by the Authority.
Whilst the hypothetical fair-minded lay observer would therefore be
led to question the judgment of the departmental case officer who
included the 48 pages within the review material given to the Authority
on behalf of the Secretary, she would not, without undue suspicion,
ﬁnd reason to question the case officer’s motive. The characterisation
of the events of November 2015 in which the appellant was involved
sometimes as a “riot”, the reference to him as having a history of
“aggressive” and “challenging” behaviour in his dealings with the
Department, the references to his mental health, and the obscure
security-related references within his “immigration history”, would be
recognised by the hypothetical fair-minded lay observer as expressions
of opinion and records of events that were all explicable in the context
of the communications in which they were originally made. Neither in
form nor in substance would she see the provision to the Authority of
the documents containing those expressions of opinion as an attempt to
communicate to the Authority an opinion of the Secretary or of any

(52)
CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264 FCR 87 at
116-117 [135], 126 [177].

94
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

41

42

officer within the Department to the effect that the appellant was a
person of bad character or otherwise unworthy to be granted a visa.
Finally, the hypothetical fair-minded lay observer would not regard
the revelations and opinions contained in the 48 pages as so shocking
as to give rise to the realistic possibility that knowing of them would
play on the subconscious of the Authority to the detriment of the
appellant. Just as the Authority could be expected to engage in an
impartial evaluation of the merits of whether or not the appellant met
the applicable criteria for the grant of a protection visa untainted by the
information about the conviction and pending charges which the
appellant had included in his form of application properly given to the
Authority by the Secretary, so the Authority could be expected to
engage in that evaluation untainted by the dashes of colour added by
the contents of those pages.

Was there a material failure of a condition precedent to the
Authority’s conducting the review?
Not only was the impugned information contained in the 48 pages
objectively
incapable
of
rationally
affecting
assessment
of
the
probability of the existence of any fact which the Authority needed to
ﬁnd in reviewing the delegate’s decision; that information was not
reasonably capable of being regarded by the Secretary at the time of
referral as capable of rationally affecting assessment of the probability
of the existence of any fact which the Authority might need to ﬁnd in
reviewing the delegate’s decision.
That conclusion of fact appears to have been seen by the Full Court
either to have lain beyond the scope of the case presented by the
appellant or to have been inappropriate to be drawn (53). However, the
appropriateness of the conclusion was raised without objection by a
ground of appeal to this Court and was effectively conceded by the
Minister in argument on the appeal.
The conclusion of fact carries with it the conclusion of law that the
inclusion of the information contained in the 48 pages did not comply
with the duty imposed on the Secretary by s 473CB(1)(c). Whether that
non-compliance would have led to the failure of a condition precedent
to the conduct of the review by the Authority turns on whether the
further conclusion is properly to be reached that non-compliance could
realistically have made any difference to the decision that the Authority
in fact went on to make.
The question so framed as of the materiality of the information
contained in the 48 pages to the decision of the Authority differs in

(53)
CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264 FCR 87 at
90 [3], 118-119 [149], 119 [152].

95
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J

43

44

45

46

47

concept and in nature from the question of whether the provision of the
information gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. The
difference is that materiality is a question of counter-factual analysis to
be determined by the court as a matter of objective possibility as an
aspect of determining whether an identiﬁed failure to comply with a
statutory condition has resulted in a decision that has in fact been made
being a decision that is wanting in statutory authorisation. The question
is not one of perception to be determined by the court by reference to
the reasonable apprehension of a hypothetical fair-minded lay observer,
which apprehension if established is of itself sufficient to result in a
want of statutory authorisation.
Nevertheless, the question of whether the information contained in
the 48 pages could realistically have made any difference to the
decision of the Authority falls to be answered by reference to the same
considerations as inform the answer already given to the question of
whether a hypothetical fair-minded lay observer, acting reasonably,
would entertain as realistic the possibility that the information might
have diverted the Authority from its statutory function of undertaking
an independent and impartial evaluation on the merits. The material
had no objective relevance to the review, can be inferred not in fact to
have been consciously taken into account by the Authority in making
the decision, and could at most be conjectured to have had a
subconscious effect on the Authority in making the decision. In those
circumstances, the negative answer already given to the latter question
leads inexorably to a negative answer to the former.

Disposition of the appeal
For these reasons, we would dismiss the appeal.

NETTLE AND GORDON JJ. A decision by a delegate of the ﬁrst
respondent to refuse the appellant’s application for a protection visa
was referred to the Immigration Assessment Authority (“the IAA”) for
review under Pt 7AA of the Migration Act 1958 (Cth) (54). The
Secretary of the Department was required to give to the IAA, among
other things, “any other material that [was] in the Secretary’s
possession or control and [was] considered by the Secretary (at the
time the decision [was] referred to the [IAA]) to be relevant to the
review” (55). The IAA had to review the decision “by considering the
review material provided to [it]” by the Secretary, without accepting or
requesting new information, and without interviewing the appel-
lant (56). Unbeknown to the appellant, the Secretary gave the IAA

(54)
Migration Act, s 473CA.
(55)
Migration Act, s 473CB(1)(c).
(56)
Migration Act, s 473DB(1).

96
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

48

49

50

material which was not only irrelevant but prejudicial to him. The
question in this appeal is whether a hypothetical fair-minded lay
observer with knowledge of the material objective facts might
reasonably apprehend that the IAA might not bring an impartial mind
to the decision before it as a result of that information being given to
it (57).
The answer to that question is “yes”. A fair-minded lay observer,
cognisant of the way Pt 7AA works (58), including the role of the
Secretary, might have apprehended that the IAA might not have
brought an impartial mind to the review, by reason of the irrelevant and
prejudicial material which the IAA was mandated to consider. The
source of the apprehended bias is the irrelevant and prejudicial
material. That material might have led the decision-maker to make a
decision otherwise than on the legal and factual merits of the case (59)
because it might have led the decision-maker to the view that the
appellant was not the sort of person who should be granted a visa or
that the appellant was not a person who should be believed. A
fair-minded lay observer might have apprehended that this might have
had an effect on the decision-maker, even if that effect was
subconscious.
The other grounds of appeal concerning an opportunity for the
appellant to be heard, the lawfulness of the actions of the Secretary of
the Department, and jurisdictional error do not arise once this
conclusion is reached.

Apprehended bias
The rule against bias for judicial and administrative decision-makers
is long standing (60). The public is entitled to expect that issues
determined by judges and other public office holders should be
decided, among other things, free of prejudice and without bias (61).
Bias, although incapable of precise deﬁnition, “connotes the absence of
impartiality” (62).
The rule against bias is one aspect of the requirements of procedural
fairness (63). Breach of the rules of procedural fairness, including

(57)
Webb v The Queen (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 73; Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in
Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 344 [6]; Isbester v Knox City Council (2015)
255 CLR 135 at 146 [20].
(58)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [20], [23].
(59)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [21].
(60)
See Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 343 [3]; Dr Bonham’s Case (1610) 8 Co Rep
113b at 118a [77 ER 646 at 652].
(61)
Webb (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 53.
(62)
Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 348 [23], 396 [182].
(63)
Plaintiff S157/2002 v The Commonwealth (2003) 211 CLR 476 at 490 [25].

97
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Nettle and Gordon JJ

51

52

53

54

where apprehended bias is demonstrated, constitutes jurisdictional
error (64), attracting relief under s 75(v) of the Constitution (65).
As the rule applies to any decision which is subject to the principles
of procedural fairness (66), it applies “not only to the judicial system
but also, by extension, to many other kinds of decision-making and
decision-makers” (67). The rule is concerned with public conﬁdence in
the administration of justice (68). It is important to the quality of
decisions being made and to the conﬁdence and cooperativeness of
individuals
affected
by
those
decisions (69).
By
enhancing
the
appearance and actuality of impartial decision-making, it fosters public
conﬁdence in decision-makers and their institutions.
The test for apprehended bias is whether “a fair-minded lay observer
might reasonably apprehend that the [decision-maker] might not bring
an impartial mind to the resolution of the question the [decision-maker]
is required to decide” (70). A ﬁnding of apprehended bias is not to be
reached lightly (71). The determination of whether an apprehension of
bias is “reasonable” is not assisted by philosophical conceptions of the
varieties of seriousness or materiality.
The test has two steps. First, one must identify what it is that might
lead a decision-maker to decide a case other than on its legal and
factual
merits (72).
What
is
said
to
affect
a
decision-maker’s
impartiality? Partiality can take many forms, including disqualiﬁcation
by direct or indirect interest in the proceedings, pecuniary or otherwise;

(64)
Plaintiff S157/2002 (2003) 211 CLR 476 at 490 [25].
(65)
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte Aala (2000) 204 CLR 82 at 89 [5], 101
[41], 106 [51]-[52], 135 [142], 136 [145], 143 [170], 144 [172]; Re Refugee
Review Tribunal; Ex parte H (2001) 75 ALJR 982 at 990 [33]; 179 ALR 425 at
435-436.
(66)
Aronson, Groves and Weeks, Judicial Review of Administrative Action and
Government Liability, 6th ed (2017), p 643 [9.10].
(67)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [22]. This includes tribunals (Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Epeabaka (2001) 206 CLR 128),
judges (Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls (2011) 244 CLR 427), jurors
(Webb (1994) 181 CLR 41), government ministers (Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng (2001) 205 CLR 507 at 529 [64]) and local
councils (Isbester v Knox City Council (2015) 255 CLR 135). It is a rule of
“almost universal application”: Groves, “The Rule Against Bias” (2009) 39 Hong
Kong Law Journal 485 at 485.
(68)
Webb (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 68.
(69)
Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd (2013) 252 CLR 38 at 107 [186]; Young, “The
Evolution of Bias: Spectrums, Species and the Weary Lay Observer” (2017) 41
Melbourne University Law Review 928 at 929.
(70)
Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 344 [6]; see also Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at
146 [20].
(71)
Re JRL; Ex parte CJL (1986) 161 CLR 342 at 371.
(72)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [21].

98
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

55

56

57

disqualiﬁcation
by
conduct;
disqualiﬁcation
by
association;
and
disqualiﬁcation by extraneous information (73). As Deane J said in
Webb v The Queen, in relation to disqualiﬁcation by extraneous
information, “knowledge of some prejudicial but inadmissible fact or
circumstance [may give] rise to [an] apprehension of bias” (74).
Second, a logical connection must be articulated between the identiﬁed
thing and the feared deviation from deciding the case on its
merits (75). How will the claimed interest, inﬂuence or extraneous
information have the suggested effect?
In applying the test, “it is necessary to consider … the legal,
statutory and factual contexts in which the decision is made” (76). It is
also necessary to consider “what is involved in making the decision
and the identity of the decision-maker” (77). This draws attention to
the fact that the test must recognise “differences between court
proceedings and other kinds of decision-making” (78). The fair-minded
lay observer knows the nature of the decision, the circumstances which
led to the decision and the context in which it was made (79). The
fair-minded lay observer has “a broad knowledge of the material
objective facts … as distinct from a detailed knowledge of the law or
knowledge of the character or ability of the [decision-maker]” (80).
Where, however, as here, the statutory context is complex, the
fair-minded lay observer at least must have knowledge of the key
elements of that scheme. In this case, those key elements, summarised
below (81), are not themselves overly complex. It is necessary to
consider the statutory regime.

Statutory context
Part 7AA of the Migration Act provides the process for review by
the IAA of decisions made by delegates of the Minister. The IAA is to
“pursue the objective of providing a mechanism of limited review that
is efficient, quick, free of bias and consistent with Division 3 (conduct
of review)” (82) (emphasis added). Part 7AA furthers that objective by
creating a “fast track reviewable decision” (83) which the Minister

(73)
Webb (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 74.
(74)
Webb (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 74.
(75)
Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [8]; Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [21].
(76)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [20].
(77)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [23].
(78)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [22]; see also Laws v Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal (1990) 170 CLR 70 at 90.
(79)
Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [23].
(80)
Webb (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 73.
(81)
See [94] below.
(82)
Migration Act, s 473FA(1). See also s 473DA(1).
(83)
Migration Act, ss 5(1), 473BB deﬁnition of “fast track reviewable decision”.

99
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Nettle and Gordon JJ

58

59

60

administering the Migration Act (or his or her delegate) is obliged to
refer to the IAA as soon as reasonably practicable after that decision is
made (84).
Part 7AA applies only to a “fast track applicant” (85) and a decision
to refuse the applicant’s visa application must not have been made
because of the character test in s 501 of the Migration Act, or on the
basis of s 5H(2), 36(1C), or 36(2C)(a) or (b) of the Migration Act (86).
Those latter provisions are concerned primarily with excluding people
who the Minister has serious reasons for considering have committed
certain international crimes, a “serious non-political crime” (87) before
entering Australia, or acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations or who the Minister considers, on reasonable grounds,
would be a danger to Australia’s security, or a danger to the Australian
community
having
been
convicted
of
a
“particularly
serious
crime” (88). Where those provisions are relied upon in making a
decision to refuse a visa, the decision will be reviewed by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal, rather than by the IAA (89). Those
provisions were not relied upon in refusing the appellant’s protection
visa.
A number of other aspects of the Part should be emphasised.
First, s 473CB(1) requires the Secretary of the Department to give
the following review material to the IAA: (a) a statement setting out
the facts found by the decision-maker, the evidence on which those
ﬁndings were based and the reasons for the decision; (b) material
provided by the applicant to the decision-maker before the decision
was made; (c) “any other material that is in the Secretary’s possession
or control and is considered by the Secretary (at the time the decision
is referred to the [IAA]) to be relevant to the review”; and (d) certain
contact details for the applicant. This appeal concerns para (c).
Second, s 473DA(2) provides that nothing in Pt 7AA “requires the
[IAA] to give to a referred applicant any material that was before the
Minister when the Minister made the [original] decision”. Indeed,
subject to the rest of Pt 7AA, the IAA must review the decision “by
considering the review material provided to [it] under section 473CB”,

(84)
Migration Act, s 473CA.
(85)
Migration Act, s 5(1) deﬁnition of “fast track applicant”.
(86)
Migration Act, s 500(1)(c).
(87)
The term “non-political crime” is further deﬁned by the Migration Act, s 5(1).
(88)
The term “particularly serious crime” is further deﬁned by the Migration Act,
s 5M.
(89)
Migration Act, s 500(1)(c).

100
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

61

62
63

64

without
accepting
or
requesting
new
information,
and
without
interviewing the applicant (90).
The IAA does not have a duty to accept new information in any
circumstances (91). Nevertheless, the IAA may “get” any documents or
information which were not before the Minister which the IAA
considers to be relevant, and may invite a person to give new
information (92). Such “new information” gained under s 473DC must
not be considered by the IAA unless it is satisﬁed that there are
exceptional circumstances which justify its consideration, and the
applicant satisﬁes the IAA that the new information could not have
been provided to the Minister before the original decision was made, or
is credible personal information which was not previously known but
which may have affected consideration of the applicant’s claims (93).
If the new information is considered by the IAA under s 473DD and
would be the reason, or part of the reason, for affirming a decision, the
IAA must give the applicant particulars of the new information (94).
The IAA must also explain to the applicant why that new information
is relevant to the review and invite the applicant to give comments on
the new information, either in writing or at an interview (95). This
obligation does not apply to “non-disclosable information” (96),
information which is about a class of persons rather than the applicant
themselves, or information which is prescribed by regulations (97).
It will be necessary to return to the application of the test for
apprehended bias in the context of Pt 7AA of the Migration Act and
the facts of this appeal. However, before doing so, it is both
appropriate and necessary to consider why the question of apprehended
bias should be considered before the other appeal grounds and, indeed,
makes the consideration of those grounds unnecessary.

Order of consideration
The rule against bias is a principle of procedural fairness, and
“principles of procedural fairness focus upon procedures rather than
outcomes” (98). The rule against bias is designed to ensure that the
process is, and appears to a fair-minded lay observer to be, a fair

(90)
Migration Act, s 473DB(1).
(91)
Migration Act, s 473DC(2).
(92)
Migration Act, s 473DC(1) and (3).
(93)
Migration Act, s 473DD.
(94)
Migration Act, s 473DE(1)(a).
(95)
Migration Act, s 473DE(1)(b) and (c).
(96)
Migration Act, s 5(1) deﬁnition of “non-disclosable information”.
(97)
Migration Act, s 473DE(3).
(98)
Applicant VEAL of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs (2005) 225 CLR 88 at 96 [16].

101
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Nettle and Gordon JJ

65

66

67

68

process. As four members of this Court said in Michael Wilson &
Partners Ltd v Nicholls (99):
“An allegation of apprehended bias does not direct attention to, or
permit consideration of, whether the judge had in fact prejudged an
issue. To ask whether the reasons for judgment delivered after trial
of the action somehow conﬁrm, enhance or diminish the existence
of a reasonable apprehension of bias runs at least a serious risk of
inverting the proper order of inquiry (by ﬁrst assuming the existence
of a reasonable apprehension). Inquiring whether there has been ‘the
crystallisation of that apprehension in a demonstration of actual
prejudgment’ (100) impermissibly confuses the different inquiries
that the two different allegations (actual bias and apprehended bias)
require to be made.” (Emphasis in original.)
The test for apprehended bias requires the court to consider what it
is which might lead a decision-maker to stray from the merits of the
case, and then to articulate a logical connection between that thing and
the feared deviation from the merits (101). These points can be, and
often are, considered before the decision is made. Here, they could
have been considered as soon as the IAA was given the material by the
Secretary. The test does not depend on anything which happens at the
time of decision, or later.
Next, the test for apprehended bias does not rest on a ﬁnding of
actual bias (102) or depend on the ﬁnal decision actually made. One
does not need to ﬁnd that the irrelevant material affected the
decision (103). One needs only to ﬁnd that the fair-minded lay
observer might have reached the conclusion that the irrelevant material
might lead to a deviation from the merits (104).
Finally, the remedies for apprehended bias reinforce the need to
consider apprehended bias upfront. In cases of apprehended bias,
recusal of the decision-maker is a possible remedy and is available
before a decision is made. Indeed, in Michael Wilson it was said (105):
“If a party to civil proceedings, or the legal representative of that
party,
knows
of
the
circumstances
that
give
rise
to
the
disqualiﬁcation
[of
a
decision-maker]
but
acquiesces
in
the
proceedings by not taking objection, it will likely be held that the
party has waived the objection.”

(99)
(2011) 244 CLR 427 at 446 [67].
(100) Nicholls v Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd (2010) 243 FLR 177 at 200 [91].
(101) Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [8]; Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [21].
(102) Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [7].
(103) Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [7].
(104) Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 344 [6].
(105) (2011) 244 CLR 427 at 449 [76] (footnote omitted).

102
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

69

70

71

Put in different terms, a remedy for apprehended bias should be
sought (and, if appropriate, made) at the earliest possible time. There is
no utility in allowing a ﬂawed process to run to its conclusion.
Here, the provision of irrelevant and prejudicial material to the IAA
immediately raised an issue of whether a fair-minded lay observer
might apprehend that the IAA might, as a result of the provision of that
information, not bring an impartial mind to the resolution of the
review. As will be seen, that question of bias having arisen and been
considered, it is not necessary in the circumstances of this appeal to go
on to consider issues of jurisdictional error which may have otherwise
affected the IAA’s ﬁnal decision.

Factual context
The appellant arrived in Australia on 13 August 2013. He was
detained on Christmas Island and was unable to apply for a visa
because of the bar in s 46A of the Migration Act. He broke a window
on 20 March 2015 while in detention and was charged with damaging
Commonwealth property (“the March 2015 incident”). He pleaded
guilty, was convicted and was released without sentence, on condition
of good behaviour for six months and the payment of $820.60 in
reparation.
The Minister lifted the s 46A visa application bar for the appellant
on 29 September 2015.
In November 2015, there were protests on Christmas Island. The
appellant was charged, he said in his visa application, with “spitting at
a guard & breaking a window” during the protests (“the Novem-
ber 2015 incident”). The appellant was transferred to a correctional
facility on 12 November 2015.
The appellant lodged an application for a safe haven enterprise visa
on 16 September 2016. He disclosed his conviction from the
March 2015 incident, and the pending charges from the Novem-
ber 2015 incident. In relation to the March 2015 incident, the
appellant’s form also said “[t]here may be further updates on the
cases”.
The visa application was refused on 14 March 2017. By letter of that
date, the Department advised that the decision had been referred to the
IAA. The Department said it had provided the IAA with the decision
record, material given by the appellant to the Department, and “any
other material the Department considers to be relevant to the review”.
That material was not identiﬁed.
The
appellant
then
received
a
letter
from
the
IAA
dated
23 March 2017. It stated that the Department had provided “all
documents they consider relevant to your case”, though these were not
identiﬁed. The IAA stated that a decision would be made on that

103
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Nettle and Gordon JJ

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

material, “unless we decide to consider new information”, but this
could only happen “in limited circumstances”.
The IAA affirmed the decision on 12 May 2017, stating that it “had
regard to the material referred by the Secretary under s 473CB of the
Migration Act 1958”. The material was not particularised.
The Minister identiﬁed the material provided to the IAA only when
the appellant sought judicial review of the IAA’s decision. The
material
included
departmental
documents
with
the
following
assertions. First, that the appellant had a “history of aggressive and/or
challenging behaviour when engaging with the [D]epartment”, and had
been “involved in many incidents while in detention” (without
identifying the history or the incidents). Second, that he had been
recommended for detention in a correctional facility while there was a
police investigation into a “riot”. Third, that Australian Border Force
had advised the Department “to not engage” with the appellant (or
other detainees) while in prison. Fourth, that the appellant was “no
longer of interest to Det Intel” and was the subject of unspeciﬁed
“on-going investigations”. There was no identiﬁcation of what, exactly,
“Det Intel” referred to. Fifth, that he had been considered for release
from detention on a Bridging E visa “on several occasions”, which the
appellant characterises as an implicit representation that his behaviour
resulted in him not being granted those bridging visas.
The appellant never had these documents. The information in the
documents went beyond what was provided by the appellant and, in
many cases, it was information of which the appellant was not even
aware. It is not known whether the delegate had the documents. The
information outlined above was irrelevant to the task of the IAA. That
information could only plausibly have gone to questions of whether the
appellant was a danger to the Australian community, or had been
convicted of a particularly serious crime. A decision on that basis could
not have been made by the IAA (106).

The decisions below
In the Federal Circuit Court of Australia, Judge Street dismissed the
appellant’s application for judicial review of the IAA’s decision. His
Honour held that the information identiﬁed by the appellant was not
such that a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that
the IAA might not bring an impartial mind to the determination of the
matter on its merits.
The appellant appealed to the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia. The appeal was dismissed by majority. Each judge gave
separate reasons. Moshinsky and Thawley JJ both found that much of

(106) See [61] above.

104
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

80

81

82

83

84

the information which the appellant claimed to be prejudicial was
already contained in the original visa application and the delegate’s
reasons for decision. This included the conviction for the March 2015
incident and the charges for the November 2015 incident. The
information which was not otherwise provided by the visa application
or the delegate’s reasons was irrelevant to the IAA’s task, but not
prejudicial enough to meet the test for apprehended bias.
Mortimer J would have allowed the appeal. Her Honour held that the
material was “plainly adverse to the appellant’s interest” in having
matters concerning his credibility, the reliability of his narrative, his
motives for seeking asylum and whether he should be granted a visa
determined in his favour. Having considered the effect of individual
pieces of information contained in the review material, her Honour
came to the view that the material overall gave:
“a strong impression that the appellant was not trustworthy, that
he was aggressive towards authority, that he challenged authority,
that
he
was
a
person
of
interest
to
officers
within
the
Commonwealth Government who were dealing with issues of
sensitivity and of national security, that he had a disregard for
Australian law and that overall, there were considerable, sustained
concerns at an official level … that the appellant posed a risk to the
safety of the … Australian community”.

Submissions in this Court
The appellant, after noting that Pt 7AA preserved the bias rule,
submitted that a fair-minded lay observer would be aware of how
Pt 7AA of the Migration Act worked. The appellant submitted that the
material provided to the IAA was “objectively irrelevant” and that the
Secretary’s error in providing it resulted in the IAA exceeding its
jurisdiction, because the legislative scheme contemplates the IAA
undertaking its review only on the basis of certain materials (which it
needs to properly exercise its powers), not including the material
impugned in this case.
The information in the review material was characterised by the
appellant as being a character assessment at best, and a “character
assassination” at worst. The appellant submitted that the material was
capable of having a subconscious effect on the IAA, and that this gave
rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. The appellant further
submitted that this apprehension was strengthened by the fact that the
information was provided by the Secretary of the Department, who
considered the material “relevant” to the review. The appellant
accepted that the risk of bias could have been “neutralised” by
affording the appellant an opportunity to comment on the material, but
that was not done in this case.

105
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Nettle and Gordon JJ

85

86

87

The Minister said that if Pt 7AA required a decision-maker to
consider information, that information could not logically cause the
decision-maker to depart from the statutory task. The information in
this case was initially said to constitute “background” to the IAA’s
decision. But during oral argument, the Minister accepted that
describing the material as “relevant” to assessment of the appellant’s
credibility or claims to protection would be to draw “a very long bow”.
The Minister further submitted that the information provided by the
Secretary was not prejudicial. The reference to the appellant no longer
being of interest to “Det Intel” was characterised as being “positive in
character”. A reference to the appellant being interviewed by the
National Security Monitoring Section did not say anything about why
that interview was held, and so could not lead to any inference on the
part of a reasonable observer. The references to investigations into a
“riot” on Christmas Island did not say that the appellant himself was
under investigation. The reference to the appellant’s history of
aggressive or challenging behaviour was explained by reference to the
appellant’s mental health, evidence of which was otherwise before the
IAA in any event. Although the Minister accepted that it may be
possible for information to be put before the IAA which is so
prejudicial as to raise an apprehension of bias, he submitted that the
material in this case did not reach that level of prejudice.
The Minister also pointed out that some of the information said to be
prejudicial had already been disclosed by the appellant himself, such as
the existence of the pending criminal charges; that even if the material
was irrelevant, the IAA was capable of putting that material aside for
the purposes of making a decision; and that it would not lead a
fair-minded lay observer to conclude that the IAA might not decide the
case on its merits. The fact that the Secretary had provided the
information, according to the Minister, conveyed no “official view”
about its signiﬁcance, and the over-provision of information by the
Secretary would rarely, if ever, constitute an error. The Minister said
that there was no prohibition on the Secretary providing additional
material which was not strictly required by s 473CB. The Minister
further submitted that there was no obligation on the IAA to seek any
comment from the appellant on the material in light of s 473DA of the
Migration Act (107).
As will be explained, the provision of irrelevant and prejudicial
material to the IAA immediately raised an issue whether a fair-minded

(107) See [102] below.

106
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

88

89

90

91

lay observer might apprehend that the IAA might, as a result of the
provision of that information, not bring an impartial mind to the
resolution of the review.

Apprehended bias here?
What might lead the IAA to decide the appellant’s case otherwise
than on its merits? The presence of prejudicial material which was
irrelevant to the question before the IAA and which the IAA was
mandated to consider. As Deane J said in Webb, “knowledge of some
prejudicial but inadmissible fact or circumstance [may give] rise to
[an] apprehension of bias” (108). Is there a logical connection between
this and the feared deviation from deciding the case on its merits? Yes.
The material was not relevant to the IAA’s task. If it inﬂuenced the
IAA, whether consciously or subconsciously, then the IAA would
deviate from deciding the case on its merits.
In light of this, might the fair-minded lay observer apprehend a lack
of impartiality? Yes. This conclusion is largely a factual one (109). It is
therefore necessary to consider the facts of the case in light of the
statutory context (110).
The fair-minded lay observer knows the key aspects of the statutory
scheme, which are as follows. First, the Secretary must give the IAA
any material which he or she considers to be “relevant” to the
review (111). Second, the IAA must conduct its review “by considering
the review material” provided under s 473CB (112). Third, it must do
so “without accepting or requesting new information” and “without
interviewing
the
referred
applicant”,
except
as
provided
by
Pt 7AA (113). Fourth, the IAA has no duty to accept or request new
information (114) and must not consider it except in exceptional
circumstances (115). Fifth, the IAA is under no obligation to give the
applicant any material which was before the Minister (116).
The appellant was not aware of the information provided by the
Secretary. The Secretary had decided that the information was
“relevant”. The IAA then had to consider that information (117),
without the appellant knowing about that information or having any
ability to comment on it.

(108) Webb (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 74.
(109) Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [20].
(110) Isbester (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [20].
(111) Migration Act, s 473CB(1)(c).
(112) Migration Act, s 473DB(1).
(113) Migration Act, s 473DB(1).
(114) Migration Act, s 473DC(2).
(115) Migration Act, s 473DD(a).
(116) Migration Act, s 473DA(2).
(117) Migration Act, s 473DB(1).

107
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Nettle and Gordon JJ

92

93

94

95

The material was prejudicial to the appellant. The material included
assertions that the appellant had a history of aggressive or challenging
behaviour, had some link to investigations of a “riot” and was himself
the subject of investigations for unspeciﬁed matters, had been of
interest to “Det Intel”, and had been refused bridging visas in the past.
These matters had not been disclosed by the appellant in his visa
application, and, in many cases, were information of which the
appellant was not even aware. Nor were they disclosed in the reasons
for the delegate’s decision. There is a risk that such information would
lead a decision-maker in the place of the IAA to have a bias against the
appellant, possibly by thinking that the appellant is not a ﬁt person to
hold a visa or that the appellant would be a danger to the community.
Of course, it does not matter whether the IAA actually had such a
bias (118), or whether the IAA in fact put the prejudicial information
aside. There is a risk of subconscious bias here (119), and that risk
cannot be cured by putting the information aside.
The idea that the information could or would be put aside is also
difficult to reconcile with the statutory scheme. As noted above (120),
the Secretary endorses the information which he or she gives to the
IAA as “relevant” to the IAA’s task. The IAA then has to consider that
information.
The Minister submitted that administrative decision-makers rou-
tinely set aside irrelevant material. But that is not the point. The
material was not only irrelevant, but also prejudicial. Putting the
material aside does not overcome the subconscious bias which might
result from seeing that material. Nor did the IAA expressly state that
the material had been put to one side (121).
Returning to the test, a fair-minded lay observer might apprehend a
lack of impartiality on the part of the IAA where: (i) material has been
designated as “relevant” by the Secretary; (ii) the IAA must have
regard to that material; (iii) the information is prejudicial to the
applicant; and (iv) that information is hidden from the applicant. A
fair-minded lay observer may well ask why prejudicial information is
provided and hidden from the applicant, if that information was not to
be taken into account. In those circumstances, the fair-minded lay
observer might apprehend that the decision-maker might decide the
case other than on its merits.

(118) Ebner (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [7].
(119) Kioa v West (1985) 159 CLR 550 at 629; Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v AMA16 (2017) 254 FCR 534 at 552 [75].
(120) See [94] above.
(121) cf AMA16 (2017) 254 FCR 534 at 552 [77].

108
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

96

97

98

99

100

This conclusion depends on the facts of this case. There may be
other cases in which the material given to the IAA was somewhat
prejudicial to an applicant, but not such as might lead a fair-minded lay
observer to apprehend a lack of impartiality. The particular point at
which prejudicial information will lead to apprehended bias cannot be
identiﬁed in the abstract. Here, the information was such that a
fair-minded lay observer might think it would bias the decision-maker
against the grant of a visa to the appellant.
If circumstances like this arise, a decision-maker may need to invite
an applicant to comment on adverse information to counteract the
apprehension of bias. Is this consistent with the statutory scheme? Yes.
Section 473DA(2) says that “nothing in this Part requires the [IAA] to
give to a referred applicant any material that was before the Minister”
when the Minister made the original decision. But this says nothing
about “what might be required of the [IAA] in particular circumstances
in order to exercise [its] power [under s 473DC(3)] reasonably” (122).
The power in s 473DC(3) allows the IAA to get new information.
While the IAA “does not have a duty to get, request or accept, any new
information” in any circumstances (123), it may still invite an applicant
to comment on information under s 473DC(3) if that would be the best
way of avoiding an apprehension of bias.
That conclusion is reinforced by the statutory scheme. The IAA is
statutorily obliged to “pursue the objective of providing a mechanism
of limited review that is efficient, quick, free of bias and consistent
with Division 3 (conduct of review)” (124) (emphasis added). The
provisions concerning the giving and receipt of new information did
not override the requirement that the IAA act free from bias.

Other appeal grounds
The Minister accepted that where apprehended bias is shown, it
would be appropriate to grant relief under s 75(v) of the Constitution,
subject to relief under s 75(v) being discretionary (125). In the
circumstances of this appeal, where the Minister accepted that if
apprehended bias was demonstrated, relief would be granted, the role
(if any) of materiality in questions of jurisdictional error, and its
precise metes and bounds, does not arise.
Moreover, given the conclusions reached on the question of
apprehended bias in this appeal, it is unnecessary to address the other

(122) Plaintiff M174/2016 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264
CLR 217 at 229 [26].
(123) Migration Act, s 473DC(2).
(124) Migration Act, s 473FA(1).
(125) Ex parte Aala (2000) 204 CLR 82 at 89 [5], 106 [51]-[52], 136 [145], 144 [172];
Ex parte H (2001) 75 ALJR 982 at 990 [33]; 179 ALR 425 at 435-436.

109
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Nettle and Gordon JJ

101

102

103

104

105

appeal grounds concerning an opportunity for the appellant to be heard,
the lawfulness of the actions of the Secretary of the Department, and
jurisdictional error on the part of the IAA resulting from the
Secretary’s allegedly unlawful actions. Indeed, given the conclusions
on the question of apprehended bias, the process of the IAA in making
the decision was not, and might not have appeared to a fair-minded lay
observer to be, a fair process. It is, for that reason alone, inappropriate
and unnecessary to consider and address the legality of an outcome of
that ﬂawed process.
The Minister contended that quashing the decision of the IAA and
remitting the matter back to it would put the IAA in an “impossible
bind”, because the IAA would once again be exposed to the prejudicial
material. Any further decision it made would, therefore, be infected by
the same apprehended bias found in this appeal. That submission
should not be accepted. Section 473EA(4) of the Migration Act
requires the IAA to return to the Secretary those documents provided
by the Secretary, after the IAA’s review is complete. Moreover, the
matter would be remitted to a differently constituted IAA. As a result,
the “impossible bind” spoken of by the Minister would not arise. The
relief would not be futile.

Conclusion
For those reasons, the appeal should be allowed with costs. Orders 1
and 2 made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia on
21 September 2018 and order 1 made by the Full Court of the Federal
Court of Australia on 12 October 2018 should be set aside and, in their
place, order that:
1. The appeal be allowed with costs.
2. Orders 1 and 2 of the Federal Circuit Court of Australia dated
8 November 2017 be set aside and, in their place, order that:
(a) the decision of the Immigration Assessment Author-
ity dated 12 May 2017 be quashed;
(b) the matter be remitted to the Immigration Assess-
ment Authority differently constituted; and
(c) the ﬁrst respondent pay the applicant’s costs.

EDELMAN J.

Introduction
A deduction from the world around us, usually as a natural
implication if it is not expressed, is that in exercising powers to
adjudicate upon the rights of others an adjudicator will be, and will be
seen to be, impartial and independent. This appeal concerns whether
that requirement of a lack of apprehended bias was violated in a
hearing by the Immigration Assessment Authority (“the Authority”).

110
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

106

107

108

The hearing was a review, under Pt 7AA of the Migration Act 1958
(Cth), of a decision of a delegate of the Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection to refuse the appellant’s application for a protection
visa. The apprehension of bias was said to arise from the existence of
irrelevant but prejudicial material provided to the Authority by the
Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Border Protection.
Before the Federal Circuit Court of Australia, and before the Full
Court of the Federal Court of Australia, the issue of apprehended bias
was raised by the appellant as a direct reason for impugning the
decision of the Authority. However, during the course of submissions
in this Court, an anterior issue was raised by the Court upon which the
parties made oral submissions and provided further written submis-
sions after the hearing of the appeal. The anterior issue is that
s 473CB(1)(c) of the Migration Act requires, as a prima facie
precondition for the exercise of any jurisdiction by the Authority, the
formation of an opinion, on reasonable grounds, by the Secretary that
the material provided to the Authority was relevant to the review. No
reasonable grounds existed for such an opinion to have been formed by
the
Secretary.
However,
s
473CB
does
not
contemplate
that
jurisdictional error will exist, invalidating the decision of the Authority,
unless the failure by the Secretary is material. The Minister accepted
that if the appellant established a reasonable apprehension of bias then
materiality would be satisﬁed. For this reason, despite the anterior
issue being resolved in favour of the appellant, the issue of
apprehended bias still arises on this appeal, although in an indirect
way.
As Nettle and Gordon JJ explain, the Federal Circuit Court and a
majority of the Full Court concluded that there was no apprehension of
bias. I agree with Nettle and Gordon JJ that this conclusion was in
error. The Secretary had provided the Authority with 48 pages of
irrelevant and prejudicial material involving prejudicial opinion,
innuendo and tacit suggestion, on the basis that the Secretary
considered that the material was relevant to the review. A fair-minded
lay observer would consider that the prejudice arising from any
consideration
of
this
irrelevant
material
could
be
substantial.
Importantly, the Authority said, in a letter to the appellant, that it would
make a decision on the basis of the information provided by the
Secretary. The Authority acknowledged in its reasons that it had
considered all of the material provided to it.
It appears from the index of the court book before the Federal
Circuit Court that the 48 pages of irrelevant material comprised a very
large part of the material provided to the Authority. And yet, the
Authority, a professional decision maker, did not suggest that any of
that irrelevant and prejudicial material that it had considered had been

111
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Edelman J

109

110

111

disregarded or had been given no weight. In these circumstances, a
fair-minded lay observer would apprehend, at the very least, that the
Authority
might
have
taken
the
material
into
account,
either
consciously or subconsciously. The apprehension might be that the
Authority might have formed adverse views of the appellant’s
character and, consciously or subconsciously, might have acted upon
those adverse views when reaching conclusions on the issues in dispute
either directly, or indirectly by the effect on its assessment of the
credibility of the appellant.
The appeal must be allowed.

The manner in which the apprehended bias issue arises

A decision of the Secretary as a prima facie pre-requisite for the
Authority’s jurisdiction
The appellant arrived in Australia on 16 August 2013. On
16 September 2016 the appellant applied for a protection visa, namely
a Safe Haven Enterprise (subclass 790) visa. The application was
refused on 14 March 2017 by a delegate of the Minister on the ground
that the appellant was not a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations. The appellant was a fast track applicant (126),
requiring the Authority to review the decision of the delegate of the
Minister (127). On 23 March 2017, a delegate of the Minister referred
the matter to the Authority as required by s 473CA.
The Authority is required to perform its function of reviewing a
decision and either affirming it or remitting it for reconsideration (128)
by “considering the review material provided to the Authority” (129).
The Authority does not have jurisdiction to review a decision to refuse
a
visa
in
various
categories
concerning
the
character
of
an
applicant (130): under s 501 (the character test), s 36(1C) (danger to
Australia’s security; danger to the Australian community, having been
convicted of “a particularly serious crime”), or ss 5H(2) and 36(2C)
(serious reasons for considering that various crimes have been
committed).

(126) Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 5(1) deﬁnition of “fast track applicant”.
(127) Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 473CC read with s 473BB deﬁnition of “fast track
reviewable decision” and s 5(1) deﬁnitions of “fast track decision” and “fast track
review applicant”.
(128) Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 473CC.
(129) Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 473DB(1).
(130) Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 473BB deﬁnition of “fast track reviewable decision”,
s 5(1) deﬁnition of “fast track decision”.

112
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

112

113

114

Section 473CB placed the Secretary under a duty to provide the
Authority with various categories of review material including the
following:
“Material
to
be
provided
to
Immigration
Assessment
Authority
(1) The Secretary must give to the Immigration Assessment
Authority the following material (review material) in respect of
each fast track reviewable decision referred to the Authority
under section 473CA:
(a) a statement that:

(i) sets out the ﬁndings of fact made by the person
who made the decision; and

(ii) refers to the evidence on which those ﬁndings
were based; and

(iii) gives the reasons for the decision;
(b) material provided by the referred applicant to the person
making the decision before the decision was made;
(c) any other material that is in the Secretary’s possession or
control and is considered by the Secretary (at the time the
decision is referred to the Authority) to be relevant to the
review; …”
A prima facie precondition for the Authority’s jurisdiction to
conduct a review of a fast track reviewable decision was compliance
by
the
Secretary
with
the
duty
under
s
473CB(1). Although
s 473CB(1)(c) is expressed in positive terms, concerning the material
that the Secretary must provide, contrary to the submission of the
Minister on this appeal it also carries an implied prohibition against the
provision of any other material which the Secretary could not
reasonably consider to be relevant to the review. The duty of the
Secretary to assess relevance might involve difficult or nuanced
decisions, particularly since the Secretary, or their delegate, might not
be aware of the issues that could be considered by the Authority.
However, subject to judicial restraint in any review of a decision of this
nature (131), the decision of the Secretary that material is considered
relevant must be formed reasonably on the material before the
Secretary (132).

(131) Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Eshetu (1999) 197 CLR 611
at 654 [137]; Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li (2013) 249 CLR 332
at 351 [30].
(132) Enﬁeld City Corporation v Development Assessment Commission (2000) 199 CLR
135 at 150 [34]; Hossain v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018)
264 CLR 123 at 136 [34].

113
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Edelman J

115

116

The Authority was provided with material by the Secretary that could
not reasonably be considered to be relevant
The Authority concluded that the appellant was not a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations (133): he was not
a refugee (134), nor was he a person entitled to complementary
protection (135). In the course of its reasons, the Authority rejected the
appellant’s claims including: (i) that he was stateless, with no right to
return to Iraq, and had travelled to Australia using an Iraqi passport
that was not genuine; (ii) that there was a real chance of harm to him in
Basra, including as a result of discrimination, by the Iraqi government
on the basis of his Faili Kurd ethnicity; and (iii) that he would be killed
or persecuted in Iraq by various extremist insurgent groups because of
his Shia religion, his Faili Kurd ethnicity, his imputed political views
including links to Iran, and his imputed statelessness.
The material provided by the Secretary to the Authority for the
purposes of the review included considerable information, innuendo
and opinions about the appellant’s character over 48 pages. It is
unclear whether any of this material had even been before the delegate
of the Minister (136). If not, and there are indications that it was not
before the delegate, the material would have been speciﬁcally chosen
by the Secretary for provision to the Authority as new information. In
either event, however, the material was not relevant to any issue which
the Authority had to decide.
The irrelevant material can be divided into three overlapping
categories of information about the appellant’s character.
One category of the irrelevant material provided by the Secretary to
the Authority concerned periods of detention of the appellant and
offences
or
alleged
offences
committed
by
the
appellant. The
underlying facts concerning the appellant’s commission of an offence,
his detention, and his charges were not controversial and were
disclosed by the appellant himself in his application. One offence, in
March 2015, to which he had pleaded guilty, involved breaking a
window whilst he was in detention. The appellant was convicted of
damage
to
Commonwealth
property
and
was
released
without
sentence, with conditions of a reparation payment and good behaviour
for six months. The other offence for which he had been charged, as he

(133) See Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 36(2)(a)-(aa); Migration Regulations 1994 (Cth),
Sch 2 cll 790.211, 790.221.
(134) Migration Act 1958 (Cth), ss 5H, 36(2)(a).
(135) Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 36(2)(aa).
(136) CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264 FCR 87 at
108 [103], 112-113 [112]-[116].

114
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

117

118

119

120

described it in his application, was “spitting at a guard & breaking a
window” during protests in November 2015.
However, the material in this ﬁrst category was not merely factual
statements about the appellant’s criminal record. It included descriptive
language and suggestions of grave concerns when describing the
appellant’s criminal charges in November 2015. The material referred
to his transfer to different prisons in Western Australia, to his alleged
“participation” in a “riot” on Christmas Island in November 2015, and
to him facing criminal charges in relation to that riot. It also included
an internal departmental email chain with an update from the office of
the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions concerning the
appellant’s “criminal matters” and statements by departmental officers
that the appellant’s criminal matters were in relation to rioting on
Christmas Island and that these criminal matters were still under
investigation by the Australian Federal Police. References were also
made to “multiple incidents” involving the appellant and there were
assertions that a Superintendent of the Australian Border Force had
recommended that the appellant remain in detention pending the
ﬁnalisation of an Australian Federal Police investigation into the “riot”
on Christmas Island.
A second category was material that, by vague suggestions and
opinions, had the potential to raise concerns about permitting the
appellant to become a member of the Australian community. Putting to
one side a reference in the materials to the appellant’s “possible mental
health issues”, which a fair-minded lay observer with knowledge of the
appellant’s broad circumstances would not today treat as prejudicial,
the appellant was described as displaying “a history of aggressive
and/or challenging behaviour when engaging with the department”. He
was twice described as having been “involved in many incidents while
in detention”, in the context of statements that he had been “considered
on several occasions for release from detention” on a bridging visa,
such that he was to “be considered as a Cat 2 BVE consideration”,
from which it might be inferred that the visa had been denied.
A third category was material that might have tacitly suggested that
the appellant might be a national security risk. There was a reference to
the appellant no longer being “of interest to Det Intel” and having been
“[e]scalated” to another departmental team. There were two references
to
the
appellant
having
an
“interview
with
National
Security
Monitoring Section” and two references to him having been “Esc
[escalated] to NSSCRT [which was accepted in oral submissions to be
a national security body]”.
There is no basis upon which, on any reasonable view, this material
could be considered relevant to the issues before the Authority. It had
no legal relevance to the issues before the Authority, including any

115
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Edelman J

121

122

123

124

assessment of the appellant’s credibility. Yet the expressions of
opinion, the innuendo, and the tacit suggestions in the material could
be seen by a fair-minded lay observer as painting a picture of the
appellant as a man of poor or doubtful character.

Non-compliance with s 473CB of the Migration Act is a jurisdictional
error if it is material
Although the provision of material that could not reasonably be seen
to be relevant to the determination of any issue before the Authority
establishes a prima facie case of jurisdictional error, s 473CB of the
Migration Act does not contemplate that jurisdictional error will exist,
and that the decision of the Authority will be invalidated, unless the
failure by the Secretary is “material”. As Professor Daly has
perceptively noted, the concept of materiality has sometimes been used
in three different senses (137).
In one sense, it might be used to describe a threshold of sufficient
seriousness before an act or omission could be treated as an “error”, or
perhaps more accurately a recognised category of administrative
injustice (138), capable of being jurisdictional in the sense of being a
condition for the exercise of authority by the decision maker. For
instance, just as a violation of the hearing rule requires real, or
practical, injustice (139), so too does a violation of the rule against bias
require an apprehension of bias to be reasonable. Contrary to the
submissions of the appellant, the receipt of prejudicial information, no
matter how trivial, will not necessarily give rise to a reasonable
apprehension of bias.
The second sense of materiality is the sense in which it has been
used in recent decisions of this Court (140). Materiality in this sense
concerns any required connection between the administrative injustice
and the decision. An administrative injustice will commonly be
intended by Parliament to be immaterial, and not capable of
invalidating a decision, if it did not involve a fundamental departure
from the proper process of decision making and if there was no
possibility that the decision would have been different. Assuming that

(137) See Daly, “A Typology of Materiality” (2019) 26 Australian Journal of
Administrative Law 134.
(138) Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin (1990) 170 CLR 1 at 36.
(139) Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte
Lam (2003) 214 CLR 1 at 14 [37]-[38]; Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZMTA (2019) 264 CLR 421 at 433 [38]; BVD17 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection (2019) 268 CLR 29 at 54 [66].
(140) Hossain v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2018) 264 CLR 123 at
136 [34]; Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZMTA (2019) 264
CLR 421 at 441 [30], 452-453 [72].

116
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

125

126

127

there is no difference in onus of proof (141), this involves an approach
that mirrors the long-standing approach to whether a miscarriage of
justice in a criminal appeal is “substantial” (142), or whether an
appellate court should order a new civil trial following a denial of
procedural fairness (143).
The third sense in which materiality has been used, but which might
better be avoided, concerns the residual discretion to refuse relief
despite the presence of jurisdictional error. This third sense can overlap
with the second sense, but it is distinct. It might also apply in cases
such as delay or bad faith (144) or in a case where there would be no
utility in a new trial (145) such as where “the illegality at issue had
subsequently been legitimised” (146).
It is unnecessary on this appeal to consider any of these different
dimensions of “materiality” other than the ﬁrst. The Minister accepted
that if the appellant established a reasonable apprehension of bias then
the Secretary’s non-compliance with s 473CB of the Migration Act
would be material. However, relying upon the ﬁrst sense of materiality,
the Minister submitted that any apprehension of bias did not reach a
threshold of reasonableness.

The principles concerning apprehended bias
The principles of apprehended bias are derived by implication and
expression from the terms of the particular statutory framework. They
are commonly an implication from the terms of the statute in the
context of the natural foundations of our legal system. As an
implication, however, their content must accommodate the particular
statutory framework (147).
Section 473FA(1), in Pt 7AA, provides that in carrying out its
functions under the Migration Act, the Authority is required to act in a

(141) Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZMTA (2019) 264 CLR 421 at
459 [93]. See also Lindsay v The Queen (2015) 255 CLR 272 at 294 [64]. But
compare (2019) 264 CLR 421 at 445 [46].
(142) BVD17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2019) 268 CLR 29 at
54-55 [67].
(143) Stead v State Government Insurance Commission (1986) 161 CLR 141 at 147;
Nobarani v Mariconte (2018) 265 CLR 236 at 247 [38].
(144) R v Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Ozone
Theatres (Aust) Ltd (1949) 78 CLR 389 at 400; Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex
parte Aala (2000) 204 CLR 82 at 108 [56]; SZBYR v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship (2007) 81 ALJR 1190 at 1197-1198 [28]; 235 ALR 609 at 618.
(145) Nobarani v Mariconte (2018) 265 CLR 236 at 248 [39].
(146) Daly, “A Typology of Materiality” (2019) 26 Australian Journal of Administrative
Law 134 at 141, referring to R (Nadarajah) v Home Secretary [2002] EWHC 2595
(Admin) at [30] and GXL Royalties Ltd v Minister of Energy (NZ) [2010] NZCA
185.
(147) Isbester v Knox City Council (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 154 [55].

117
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Edelman J

128

129

130

131

manner that is “free of bias”. Although Subdiv A of Div 3 of Pt 7AA is
headed “[n]atural justice requirements” and relates to the conduct of
reviews by the Authority, s 473DA provides that Div 3, together with
ss 473GA and 437GB, is an “exhaustive statement” only of the natural
justice hearing rule. It is not concerned with the rule against bias
(whether actual or apprehended). With the long-standing approach to
the natural components of justice, the express reference to bias in
s 473FA(1) is not limited to actual subjective bias but extends also to
circumstances where the bias might reasonably be apprehended by a
fair-minded lay observer.
The test for a reasonable apprehension of bias is a test of a “double
might”:
whether
a
fair-minded
lay
observer
might
reasonably
apprehend that the adjudicator might not bring an impartial and
independent
mind
to
the
fair
resolution
of
the
issue
to
be
decided (148). The notion of independence and impartiality is not
limited to prejudgment of the issue. It is a “recognition of human
nature” (149) and “human frailty” (150). It can include any other
“preponderating disposition or tendency” and can arise by matters that
create emotions of sufficient strength to sway opinion: “affection or
enmity” (151), “fear, hatred or love” (152).
The prism through which a reasonable apprehension of bias is tested,
a fair-minded lay observer, is a familiar legal construct used for
objective assessment. The construct assumes that the person is
“intelligent” (153). The person will be aware of the phenomenon that
in adjudication, as in life generally, the mental plasticity of human
decision making is subject to the unconscious (154)
“stream of tendency, whether you choose to call it philosophy or
not, which gives coherence and direction to thought and action. …
Deep below consciousness are other forces, the likes and the

(148) Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 344-345 [6]-[7];
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie (2011) 242 CLR 283 at
322 [104]; see also at 331 [139]. See also Isbester v Knox City Council (2015) 255
CLR 135 at 146 [20]-[21], 149 [33], 154 [57].
(149) British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie (2011) 242 CLR 283 at
331 [139].
(150) Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 345 [8].
(151) Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng (2001) 205 CLR
507 at 563 [183].
(152) British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie (2011) 242 CLR 283 at
300 [34], quoting Bracton, On the Laws and Customs of England, Woodbine ed,
Thorne trans (1977), vol 4, f 411, p 280.
(153) R v Watson; Ex parte Armstrong (1976) 136 CLR 248 at 267.
(154) Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process (1921), pp 12, 167 (footnote omitted).
See R v S (RD) [1997] 3 SCR 484 at 508-509 [47].

118
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

132

133

dislikes, the predilections and the prejudices, the complex of
instincts and emotions and habits and convictions, which make the
[person]”.
In Webb v The Queen (155), Deane J, who was not dissenting on this
point, described four overlapping categories of apprehended bias. The
submissions on this appeal focused upon the fourth category: “cases
where knowledge of some prejudicial but inadmissible fact or
circumstance gives rise to the apprehension of bias”. But some of the
matters mentioned in the second category were also submitted to be
relevant: “conduct, either in the course of, or outside, the proceedings”,
including the published reasons of the Authority.
Apprehended bias must be assessed by reference to all the
circumstances existing at the relevant time of enquiry. If apprehended
bias is assessed at the conclusion of a hearing, as the appeal in this case
requires, then the reasons for decision might reveal matters relevant to
the consideration of whether a reasonable apprehension exists. It would
be absurd if, on the one hand, remarks made by the decision maker
during the course of a hearing could be considered as part of an
assessment of the presence of reasonable apprehension of bias but, on
the other hand, remarks at the conclusion of the proceeding could
not (156). However, remarks at the conclusion of a proceeding or in
reasons for decision are only one of the circumstances to take into
account. In Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls (157), a joint
judgment of four members of this Court cautioned against the error of
assuming a reasonable apprehension of a decision maker’s bias and
using comments in the reasons for judgment by the decision maker to
“conﬁrm,
enhance
or
diminish
the
existence
of
a
reasonable
apprehension of bias”.
In assessing whether a reasonable apprehension of bias arose
through the construct of the fair-minded lay observer, the nature of the
decision maker is a relevant consideration (158). When assessing
whether the presence of the irrelevant material could have given rise to
a reasonable apprehension of bias, the Authority should not be equated
with
a
judicial
officer,
whose
“independence
and
security
of
tenure” (159) might permit a more robust approach to be taken to any
possibility of inﬂuence from material provided by senior officers of the

(155) (1994) 181 CLR 41 at 74. See also Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000)
205 CLR 337 at 348-349 [24].
(156) See British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie (2011) 242 CLR
283 at 316 [83].
(157) (2011) 244 CLR 427 at 446 [67].
(158) Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 343-344 [4];
Isbester v Knox City Council (2015) 255 CLR 135 at 146 [22].
(159) Ebner v Offıcial Trustee in Bankruptcy (2000) 205 CLR 337 at 344 [4].

119
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Edelman J

134

135

136

Executive Government and whose “training, tradition and oath or
affirmation require [the judge] to discard the irrelevant, the immaterial
and the prejudicial” (160). On the other hand, a professional decision
maker in a specialised area, such as the Authority, should not be
equated with a purely lay body such as a jury (161).

The effect of the irrelevant material in this case
There are three matters which combine to compel the conclusion
that a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the
Authority might not have brought an impartial and independent mind
to the issue to be decided at the hearing.
First, the material provided by the Secretary to the Authority was
qualitatively and quantitatively signiﬁcantly prejudicial to an assess-
ment of the appellant’s character on grounds other than legal grounds.
The three categories of material, over nearly 50 pages, provided
opinion, suggestion, and innuendo in relation to the appellant’s
criminal charges concerning “rioting” in November 2015, unspeciﬁed
“multiple incidents” involving the appellant, alleged but unspeciﬁed
aggressive behaviour, “[e]scalation” of consideration of the appellant
including by national security bodies, and interviews of him by the
National Security Monitoring Section.
The Minister submitted that some of the prejudicial information
provided by the Secretary should, in effect, be disregarded because the
appellant had himself provided that information in response to
questions in his visa application. But the information provided by the
appellant
was
factual
statements
of
relatively
minor,
although
irrelevant, content. The appellant said that he was “awaiting trial on
charges of spitting at a guard & breaking a window”, that he had been
convicted of “[b]reaking window – in prison and has 6 month good
behaviour
bond”,
that
his
occupation
was
“Prisoner
(formerly
self-employed)”, and that his previous addresses included prisons in
Western Australia. None of the information provided by the appellant
involved any of the opinion, suggestion or innuendo described above.
Secondly, the fair-minded lay observer would expect the Authority
to have been aware that, by s 473CB(1) of the Migration Act, material
was provided by the Secretary on the basis that the Secretary
considered that it was relevant to the review, and that by s 473DB(1)
the Authority was required to consider that material. Although the
Authority, as a professional decision maker in a specialised area, would
be expected to make its own assessment of relevance and weight, the

(160) Johnson v Johnson (2000) 201 CLR 488 at 493 [12], quoting Vakauta v Kelly
(1989) 167 CLR 568 at 584-585.
(161) Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v AMA16 (2017) 254 FCR 534 at
536 [3].

120
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019

137

138

139

140

fair-minded lay observer would be aware that the Authority remains
part of the Executive Government. The apparent assessment of the
material, and the opinions and innuendos contained therein, as relevant
by the Secretary or a delegate of the Secretary, and the provision of 48
pages of materials to the Authority concerning issues in the three broad
categories described above, is a matter that, at least subconsciously,
might be expected to have an inﬂuence upon the Authority that
considers it.
Thirdly, although the material was irrelevant, the fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably have expected from statements made by the
Authority, together with a deafening silence in the reasons of the
Authority, that the Authority might have been inﬂuenced by the
information within the material. On 23 March 2017, prior to reaching
its decision, the Authority wrote to the appellant and said that the
Department had “provided us with all documents they consider
relevant to your case” and that the Authority would “make a decision
on your case on the basis of the information sent to us by the
department, unless we decide to consider new information”. At the
outset of its reasons for decision, in the second paragraph, the
Authority said that it had “had regard to the material referred by the
Secretary under s 473CB of the Migration Act 1958”. Nowhere in its
reasons did the Authority suggest that any of the material provided by
the Secretary was not relevant or that weight had not been placed on
any of the material provided by the Secretary.
In these circumstances, a fair-minded lay observer would apprehend
that the material, together with the basis upon which it was apparently
provided, might cause the Authority to form adverse views of the
appellant’s character and, consciously or subconsciously, the Authority
might be inﬂuenced by those adverse views either directly in the
course of dismissing each of the appellant’s claims to be a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations or indirectly
when reaching conclusions based upon the credibility of the appellant.

Conclusion
The appeal should be allowed and orders made as proposed by
Nettle and Gordon JJ. The matter should be remitted to a differently
constituted Authority for a new hearing. Since the Authority will have
returned all materials to the Secretary (162), the new hearing will
require the Secretary to re-exercise the task of considering which of the
material that is in the Secretary’s possession or control is relevant to
the review.

(162) Migration Act 1985 (Cth), s 473EA(4).

121
268 CLR 76]
CNY17 V MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION
Edelman J

141

142

143

1. Appeal allowed with costs.
2. Set aside orders 1 and 2 made by the Full
Court of the Federal Court of Australia on
21 September 2018 and order 1 made by
the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia on 12 October 2018 and, in their
place, order that:
(a) the appeal be allowed with costs;
and
(b) orders 1 and 2 of the Federal
Circuit of Australia dated 8 Novem-
ber 2017 be set aside and, in their
place, order that:
(i) the decision of the Immigra-
tion
Assessment
Authority
dated
12
May
2017
be
quashed;
(ii) the matter be remitted to the
Immigration Assessment Au-
thority differently constituted;
and
(iii) the ﬁrst respondent pay the
applicant’s costs.

Solicitors for the appellant, Estrin Saul Lawyers.

Solicitor for the ﬁrst respondent, Australian Government Solicitor.
WJN

122
COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS
[2019