FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA

Stowers v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

[2018] FCAFC 174

Flick, Griffiths and Derrington JJ

10 August, 12 October 2018

Immigration
—
Visas
—
Cancellation
—
Where
appellant’s
visa
was
mandatorily cancelled due to failure to pass character test — Where
appellant made representations as to why cancellation should be revoked
— Where Assistant Minister refused to revoke cancellation on ground that
appellant had displayed disregard for judicial orders — Whether Assistant
Minister denied procedural fairness to appellant by failing to put him on
notice of possibility of ﬁnding — Migration Act 1958 (Cth), s 501.

The appellant’s visa was mandatorily cancelled pursuant to s 501(3A) of the
Migration Act 1958 (Cth). The Department of Immigration and Border Protection
invited the appellant to make representations as to why the decision to cancel his
visa should be revoked. In its invitation the Department drew attention to a
Direction that provided that protection of the Australian community from criminal
or other “serious conduct” was one of three primary considerations that would be
taken into account. An annex to the Direction provided that “serious conduct”
included “involvement in activities indicating contempt or disregard for the law”.
The appellant made representations in response to the invitation and the
material provided by the Department. However, after the appellant had responded,
the Department invited him to comment upon additional material. The additional
material included a National Police Certiﬁcate and sentencing remarks from both
the Local Court and the District Court in respect of convictions for breaches of
judicial orders and noncustodial dispositions. The Department did not draw
attention to the Direction in its further invitation. The appellant made further
representations in response.
The Assistant Minister decided not to revoke the cancellation of the appellant’s
visa. He found that the appellant’s prior conduct displayed a “disregard for
judicial orders” which he said gave him “pause in accepting unquestionably that
[the appellant] will not reoffend if returned to the community”. The appellant
argued that the Assistant Minister denied him procedural fairness by failing to put
him on notice of the potential of the ﬁnding that he had displayed a disregard for
judicial orders. The respondent relied upon the fact that the Department had drawn
the appellant’s attention to the Direction.

Held: The Assistant Minister failed to afford the appellant procedural fairness
by failing to put the appellant on notice of the basis upon which he concluded that
the appellant displayed a disregard for judicial orders. [54]-[57]
NBNB v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2014) 220 FCR 44,
applied.

177
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION
265 FCR]

Commissioner for Australian Capital Territory Revenue v Alphaone Pty Ltd
(1994) 49 FCR 576; SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs (2006) 228 CLR 152, considered.
Per curiam: (i) A person in the shoes of the appellant would not reasonably
have inferred that conduct referred to in the additional material could be viewed as
“involvement in activities indicating contempt or disregard for the law” because
the invitation to comment upon the additional material was not accompanied by a
copy of the Direction. [54]-[55]
(ii) It was not reasonably apparent on the face of the additional material that its
contents might be used by the Assistant Minister to conclude that the appellant
had displayed a disregard for judicial orders because the remarks made by the
District Court and Local Court were not unequivocal in that regard. [56]
(iii) The Assistant Minister did not particularise which breaches of judicial
orders and noncustodial dispositions he had in mind when he found that the
appellant had displayed disregard for judicial orders. [56]

Cases Cited
Applicant VEAL of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs (2005) 225 CLR 88.
Assistant Commissioner Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd (2013) 252 CLR 38.
Attorney-General (Hong Kong) v Ng Yuen Shiu [1983] 2 AC 629.
Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin (1990) 170 CLR 1.
Brock v Minister for Home Affairs [2010] FCA 1301.
Dagli v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2003) 133 FCR 541.
Haoucher v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (1990) 169 CLR 648.
Immigration and Border Protection, Minister for v WZARH (2015) 256 CLR
326.
Immigration and Citizenship, Minister for v SZQHH (2012) 200 FCR 223.
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Minister for v Bhardwaj (2002) 209 CLR
597.
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Re Minister for; Ex parte Miah (2001)
206 CLR 57.
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Re Minister for; Ex
parte Lam (2003) 214 CLR 1.
Kioa v West (1985) 159 CLR 550.
Mobil Oil Australia Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1963) 113
CLR 475.
NBMZ v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2014) 220 FCR 1.
NBNB v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2014) 220 FCR 44.
Revenue, Commissioner for Australian Capital Territory v Alphaone Pty Ltd
(1994) 49 FCR 576.
Saeed v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (2010) 241 CLR 252.
Salemi v MacKellar (No 2) (1977) 137 CLR 396.
Santhirarajah v Attorney-General (Cth) (2012) 206 FCR 494.
Snedden v Minister for Justice (2014) 230 FCR 82.
Splendido v Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (No 2)
[2018] FCA 1158.

178
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

Stead v State Government Insurance Commission (1986) 161 CLR 141.
Stowers v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection [2018] FCA 485.
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2006) 228 CLR 152.
SZQNO v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2012] FCA 326.
TCL Air Conditioner (Zhongshan) Company Ltd v Castel Electronics Pty Ltd
(2014) 232 FCR 361.
Traill v McRae (2002) 122 FCR 349.
Tuncok v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 1069.

Appeal
G Johnson, for the appellant.
R Francois, for the respondent.

12 October 2018

The Court
This appeal raises the question, in the context of the relevant statutory
framework
and
factual
circumstances
here,
whether
procedural
fairness
requirements obliged the then Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection (Assistant Minister) to do more than he did to put the appellant on
notice of how material which was disclosed to the appellant might be used by
the Assistant Minister in deciding whether or not to revoke a mandatory visa
cancellation decision.
The appeal is from a decision dated 11 April 2018 by a Judge of this Court.
The decision is reported as Stowers v Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection [2018] FCA 485. The primary judge dismissed the appellant’s
judicial review application and complaint of procedural unfairness in respect of
a decision dated 9 August 2017 by the Assistant Minister not to revoke a
decision dated 23 December 2016 to cancel the appellant’s Class TY
Subclass 444 Special Category (Temporary) visa (the visa). The Assistant
Minister’s decision was purportedly made under s 501CA(4) of the Migration
Act 1958 (Cth) (the Act).

Summary of background facts
The appellant is a citizen of New Zealand. He came to Australia in 2005
when he was 19 years old.
The appellant’s visa was mandatorily cancelled under s 501(3A) of the Act
because he had a “substantial criminal record” under s 501(7)(c) and
consequently did not pass the “character test” in s 501(6)(a). He had a
“substantial criminal record” because, on 22 July 2016, he was convicted in the
Local Court in Gosford of ﬁve offences, including two counts of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm for which he was sentenced to a 14 months term
of imprisonment. The offences involved domestic violence. The appellant has a
long criminal record in Australia dating back to 2008, including break and enter
(2008); two convictions for driving while disqualiﬁed (for the ﬁrst, in 2013,
Mr Stowers was given a community service order and, for the second
conviction, in 2014, he was sentenced to imprisonment for four months), failing
to appear in accordance with a bail condition (2013) and driving while his

179
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

1

2

3

4

licence was suspended (2010). Mr Stowers also had a criminal record in New
Zealand, and was convicted of burglary in 2004 in the Manukau District Court.
By a letter dated 23 December 2016, the appellant was notiﬁed of the visa
cancellation decision. The appellant was incarcerated at the time and he was
subsequently taken into immigration detention, where he remains. He was
invited under s 501CA(3) to make representations as to whether he passed the
character test or whether there was “another reason” why the visa cancellation
decision should be revoked. He was provided with a copy of Direction 65
(which contains directions given by the Minister under s 499 of the Act to
decision-makers concerning the exercise of power to refuse or cancel a visa on
character grounds and the exercise of power to revoke a mandatory cancellation
of a visa). He was told that it identiﬁed issues that were relevant to the
revocation request. The letter clariﬁed that, although Direction 65 was binding
on a delegate, if the Minister made a revocation decision personally, he or she
was not bound by Direction 65, “although Direction 65 provides a broad
indication of the types of issues that the Minister is likely to take into account in
deciding whether or not to revoke the decision to cancel your visa”. The letter
stated that the appellant “should address each paragraph in PART C of the
Direction that is relevant to your circumstances”.
Part C of the Direction, which forms approximately 6 of the 33 pages of the
document, identiﬁes “primary considerations” to be taken into account in
determining whether or not to revoke the mandatory cancellation of a visa. One
of three primary considerations is protection of the Australian community from
criminal or other “serious conduct”. “Serious conduct” is deﬁned as follows in
Annex B of the Direction:

Behaviour or conduct of concern where a conviction may not have been recorded,
or where the conduct may not, strictly speaking, have constituted a criminal
offence.
Such conduct may include, for example, involvement in activities indicating
contempt or disregard for the law or human rights, or a history of serious
breaches of immigration law. It also includes conduct which may be considered
under s 501(6)(c) and/or s 501(6)(d).
(Emphasis added.)
Under cl 13.1 of the Direction, decision-makers are told that they should have
regard to the principle that the Government is committed to protecting the
Australian community from harm “as a result of criminal activity or other
serious conduct by non-citizens”. Decision-makers are also required by
cl 13.1(2) to give consideration to:

a) The nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s conduct to date; and
b) The risk to the Australian community should the non-citizen commit
further offences or engage in other serious conduct.
(Emphasis added.)
The Direction contains further information for decision-makers relating to the
nature and seriousness of the conduct (cl 13.1.1) and the risk to the Australian
community should the non-citizen commit further offences or engage in other
serious conduct (cl 13.1.2).
The Department’s 23 December 2016 letter attached several documents,
including a conviction, sentences and appeals report dated 16 December 2016
from
the
New
South
Wales
Department
of
Corrective
Services
(the

180
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

5

6

7

8

9

State Certiﬁcate), which set out details of the appellant’s convictions,
sentences and appeals. It should be interpolated at this point that those details
were not as comprehensive as the details set out in a National Police Certiﬁcate
dated 19 December 2016 (ie only three days later), a copy of which was
provided to Mr Stowers ﬁve months after he was given the State Certiﬁcate (see
[18] below).

The State Certiﬁcate identiﬁed Mr Stowers’ convictions in the Local Court in
Gosford on 22 July 2016 and the outcome of his appeal to the District Court on
9 August 2016. The State Certiﬁcate did not record Mr Stowers’ convictions in
the Liverpool Local Court on 1 April 2010 for multiple traffic offences including
using an uninsured motor vehicle, not stopping at a stop line and driving while
his licence was suspended. The State Certiﬁcate was also silent on such matters
as Mr Stowers’ two convictions in 2013 and 2014 for driving while disqualiﬁed
from holding a licence (see [4] above) and his convictions on 26 June 2013 of
common assault (dv), driving while disqualiﬁed from holding a licence and “fail
to appear in accordance with Bail Granted undertaking”, noting, however, that
the State Certiﬁcate discloses an entry on 26 June 2013 described simply as
“bail at court”.

These matters were recorded, however, in the National Police Certiﬁcate
which was subsequently provided to Mr Stowers. These additional matters were
apparently relied upon by the Assistant Minister as demonstrating that
Mr Stowers’ prior conduct involving “convictions for breaches of judicial
orders and noncustodial dispositions” indicated that he “displays a disregard for
judicial orders”, which formed part of his reasoning for not revoking the visa
cancellation decision.

Another document which was enclosed with the Department’s earlier letter
dated 23 December 2016 was a copy of a Departmental File Note dated
23 December 2016. It recorded that Mr Stowers was serving a term of
14 months imprisonment for his convictions in the Local Court at Gosford on
22 July 2016 of Assault Occasioning Actual Bodily Harm and Assault
Occasioning Actual Bodily Hard (DV).

The Department’s letter dated 23 December 2016 informed Mr Stowers that
the basis upon which the decision-maker was satisﬁed that he did not pass the
character test (thereby triggering mandatory cancellation under s 501(3A)) was
the information contained in the State Certiﬁcate. He was also told that some of
the information which was enclosed with the letter was “adverse information
that may undermine the possible revocation of the decision to cancel your visa”
and that he might wish to “provide speciﬁc comments regarding the enclosed
information, in particular the adverse information”. The letter did not contain
any greater speciﬁcation of the “adverse information”.

In response, on or about 29 December 2016, Mr Stowers completed and
returned to the Department a pro forma document which was titled “Request for
Revocation of a Mandatory Visa Cancellation under s 501(3A)”.

As mentioned above, by a later letter dated 30 May 2017, the Department
wrote again to Mr Stowers and invited him to comment on additional
information which, he was then told, might be taken into account in making the
decision whether to revoke the visa cancellation. The information comprised:
(a) a National Police Certiﬁcate dated 19 December 2016;

181
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

10

11

12

13

14

15

(b) transcripts of the judgment and/or remarks of both the Gosford Local
Court and District Court on 22 July 2016 and 9 August 2016
respectively;

(c) conﬁdential correspondence from the New Zealand Police dated
29 March 2017; and

(d) Incoming Passenger Cards dated 16 September 2005 and 5 August
2006. In respect of these documents, the 30 May 2017 letter speciﬁcally
stated that the appellant had indicated on those cards that he had no
criminal convictions. To that extent, Mr Stowers was given some
indication as to why these particular documents contained adverse
information that may undermine the possible revocation of the
mandatory cancellation decision. No similar speciﬁcation was provided
in respect of the rest of the additional material which was enclosed with
the letter dated 30 May 2017.

Mr
Stowers
promptly
acknowledged
receipt
of
the
30
May
2017
correspondence. Subsequently, on 9 August 2017, he sent an email to the
Department to which he attached what he described as a “letter of response to
my criminal offenses” [sic]. He said in his letter that this was his “letter of
explanation to my past criminal offences and my plea of another chance to stay
here in Australia to raise and to be with my young family and loved ones”. He
said that he accepted “the facts I’ve committed offences of a serious nature”. He
said that he was ashamed of the choices he had made in his past, but that he
wished to be given an opportunity to remain in Australia, including to raise his
family of three young children. He said nothing speciﬁcally about breaches of
judicial orders or “noncustodial dispositions”.

Given their signiﬁcance in the appeal, it is desirable to say something more
about the National Police Certiﬁcate and the remarks of both the Magistrate on
22 July 2016 and the District Court Judge on 9 August 2016 respectively, copies
of which were sent to Mr Stowers on 30 May 2017 by the Department.

(a) National Police Certiﬁcate: The National Police Certiﬁcate contained
information in relation to what was described as “disclosable court outcomes”
relating to Mr Stowers. The information was spread over three pages. As noted
in [11] above, it contained additional information to that which was recorded in
the State Certiﬁcate which had been provided 5 months previously to
Mr Stowers. It is well to set out the entirety of the National Police Certiﬁcate:

182
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

16

17

18

183
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

184
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

(b) Local Court Magistrate’s sentencing remarks: In the course of sentencing
Mr Stowers on 22 July 2016, the transcript records the Magistrate as making the
following remarks:

The accused is a person who is not unknown to the Court. He has got a history of
offending albeit in different matters at some stage; break, enter or steal, driving
matters, high range drink driving, driving while suspended. But importantly in

185
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

19

2011, he was put on a good behaviour bond for an assault — a domestic related
assault. And now he has these offences. The Court indicated on the last occasion
that a gaol term was the appropriate penalty and as a request from the accused, he
wished to be assessed for an intensive correction order.
The report reads this way. That his previous community service was revoked for
non-completion. He demonstrated..(not transcribable)..getting information in this
report. He was telephoned, didn’t turn up, telephoned again, said he could
not..(not transcribable)..because he had work commitments. It was 7 July he
turned up, this information was given, but he has not been in contact with the
community people since that time. And he has understandably been assessed as
unsuitable for an intensive correction order. It has been urged on me that I should
impose a term of imprisonment, but that should be suspended. Why it should be a
suspended, I am not quite sure. I would have thought every indication at the
moment if I was to suspend a sentence, he would not comply with, he could not
comply with a direction to attend by the Probation and Parole in the past, he has
not been able to comply with community service orders he has been given in the
past. My view is that a term of full time imprisonment is the only appropriate
penalty.

The reference to a “report” at the beginning of the second paragraph of the
extracts appears to be a reference to some form of sentencing report which was
before the Local Court. The precise position is unclear, however, because a copy
of the report was not before the Assistant Minister when he made the decision.
(c) District Court Judge’s remarks on appeal: As noted above, Mr Stowers
appealed against the sentences imposed upon him on 22 July 2016. A District
Court Judge reduced the non-parole period from 9 to 6 months which
Mr Stowers had to serve but otherwise conﬁrmed the sentences. The transcript
records the Judge as saying:

HIS HONOUR: He is now 30 years of age. His record does not have a sense of
violence. There is one early matter. He has a couple of drink driving matters
which are serious. In 2011 an assault for which he got a s. 9 good behaviour bond.
Apparently complied with that. He has had some serious driving matters which
resulted in CSO, community service, and now he has come under notice for these
matters.
…
… I accept that he will endeavour to get treatment, maintain treatment and try
and stay out of trouble in the future.
…
He is to be released to parole at the expiration of the non-parole period and he
is then subject to the supervision and guidance of the Parole Authority as provided
for in the standard conditions of parole prescribed under the relevant Act. Upon
his release to parole it is recommended to the Parole Authority that it direct the
offender to accept the supervision and guidance of Community Corrections
generally and speciﬁcally as to substance and alcohol abuse and relapse
prevention, anger management and impulse control, mental health issues and
related ongoing treatment and medication including the implementation of a
Mental Health Treatment Care Plan as arranged and directed by a general medical
practitioner or related health service provider.

It is unclear what the Judge relied upon when he referred to Mr Stowers
being given a “s 9 good behaviour bond” in 2011. That date does not appear on
either the State Certiﬁcate or the National Police Certiﬁcate (both of which
post-date the District Court proceeding but which, presumably, are accurate
records as to the matters with which they deal). The National Police Certiﬁcate

186
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

20

21

22

records that, on 26 June 2013, Mr Stowers was given a s 9 bond for his
conviction of common assault (dv) and, in relation to the offence of failing to
appear in accordance with bail, the National Police Certiﬁcate records that, on
the same day, he was given a s 10a conviction, with no other penalty. The
reference to “s 10a” is an apparent reference to s 10A of the Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999 (NSW). Under that provision, a Court could enter a
conviction against the offender, without imposing any other penalty.
It is signiﬁcant, however, that the District Court Judge took a more
favourable view than the Magistrate of Mr Stowers’ past and likely future
compliance with judicial orders. The Judge not only reduced the non-parole
period, but also made observations and recommendations concerning the future
supervision and guidance of Mr Stowers while he was on parole. As noted in
the extracts in [21] above, the Judge expressly stated his view that Mr Stowers
would get and maintain treatment and would “try and stay out of trouble in the
future” and that Mr Stowers had apparently complied with the s 9 good
behaviour bond.

The Assistant Minister’s decision and statement of reasons
On 9 August 2017, the Assistant Minister decided not to revoke the
cancellation decision. The appellant was provided with a statement of reasons
for that decision, as required by s 501G(1) of the Act.
The statement of reasons is in a familiar form. It broadly reﬂects the structure
and considerations in Direction 65. Part of the statement addresses the topic
“Protecting the Australian Community”. This part of the statement is divided
into two sections, one dealing with “Criminal conduct” and the other dealing
with “Risk to the Australian community”. On the former issue, the Assistant
Minister noted that during the eight years in which Mr Stowers offended, “he
was convicted of numerous driving related offences, breaking and entering as
well as violent offences including common assault (dv), and assault occasioning
actual bodily harm (dv)”. The Assistant Minister made reference to the
sentencing remarks of the Magistrate and the District Court Judge, the latter of
whom described the offences for which Mr Stowers was convicted on
22 July 2016 as “horrendous” and that what had occurred was “an act of
unmitigated and continuing violence”.
On the issue of risk to the Australian community, the Assistant Minister said
that he had considered whether Mr Stowers posed a risk to the Australian
community through re-offending by having regard to any mitigating or causal
factors in his offending, and also by giving consideration to the steps taken by
Mr Stowers to reform and address his behaviour, including the steps he had
taken to address his mental health issues. It is in this section of the Assistant
Minister’s statement of reasons that reference is made in [44] and [45] to
Mr Stowers’ convictions for breaches of judicial orders and noncustodial
dispositions.
It is desirable to set out those paragraphs of the Assistant Minister’s statement
of reasons because they are at the heart of Mr Stowers’ complaint of procedural
unfairness:

44. I have considered Mr STOWERS’ convictions for breaches of judicial
orders and noncustodial dispositions, as well as his false declaration on
an incoming passenger card on which he indicated that he had no criminal
convictions
at
the
time
when
he
held
a
criminal
conviction
in
New Zealand. I ﬁnd that Mr STOWERS’ prior conduct displays a

187
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

23

24

25

26

27

disregard for judicial orders and gives me pause in accepting
unquestioningly
that
he
will
not
reoffend
if
returned
to
the
community.
45. I cannot rule out the likelihood of Mr STOWERS reoffending in future,
particularly if exposed to external stressors and/or if he neglects to manage
his mental health issues. I ﬁnd that there is an ongoing likelihood that
Mr STOWERS will reoffend, albeit it a low one and should he offend in a
similar manner, it would result [sic] physical and psychological harm to a
member or members of the Australian community.
(Emphasis added.)
It may be noted that the Assistant Minister did not identify in his statement of
reasons
the
speciﬁc
“convictions
for
breaches
of
judicial
orders
and
non-custodial dispositions” which are referred to at a level of generality in [44].

The primary judgment
Only one ground of judicial review was pressed below. It was that the
Assistant Minister denied Mr Stowers procedural fairness. The primary judge
summarised the particulars of this ground at [8] of her Honour’s reasons for
judgment:

(1) On 30 May 2017, the Minister sent a letter to Mr Stowers informing him
that the Minister had information which may be taken into account when
making his decision whether to revoke the cancellation decision. That
information included a National Police Certiﬁcate dated 19 December
2016.
(2) The Minister failed to put Mr Stowers on notice of the potential adverse
effect of the National Police Certiﬁcate.
(3) At [44] of the decision record, the Minister relied expressly on
“convictions for breaches of judicial orders and non-custodial disposi-
tions” in causing him to “pause in accepting unquestioningly that
Mr Stowers will not reoffend if returned to the community”.
(4) The adverse inference drawn by the Minister from the information in his
possession, including the National Police Certiﬁcate, was not an obvious
inference or a conclusion obviously open on the known material.
Mr Stowers was denied an opportunity to comment on the information in
the Minister’s possession. The denial of procedural fairness may have
affected the outcome of the Minister’s consideration of the exercise of
power under s 501CA(4).
(Emphasis in original.)
The primary judge’s reasons for dismissing the procedural unfairness ground
may be summarised as follows. First, the primary judge stated that if the only
material provided to the appellant was the 23 December 2016 letter and its
attachments, she would have been persuaded that the Assistant Minister’s
ﬁndings at [44] of the statement of reasons were not “obviously open on the
known material”, despite the terms of Direction 65. Her Honour described as
“unsurprising” that Mr Stowers’ initial representations did not address his
driving offences or his failure to comply with the bail undertaking or
community services orders, matters which were raised in the National Police
Certiﬁcate which he was given on 30 May 2017.
Secondly, her Honour did not accept Mr Stowers’ submission that the
Assistant Minister’s remarks at [44] of his statement of reasons addressed only
the matter of Mr Stowers’ conviction (without penalty) on 23 June 2013 for his
failure to comply with a bail undertaking. Her Honour found at [26] that the

188
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

28

29

30

31

National Police Certiﬁcate, when taken with the sentencing remarks in the Local
Court, clearly raised the issue that Mr Stowers had failed to comply not only
with the bail undertaking, but also with other noncustodial dispositions of his
convictions, an example of which given by the primary judge was driving while
disqualiﬁed.
Thirdly, the essence of the primary judge’s reasons for rejecting Mr Stowers’
complaint of procedural unfairness are captured in [27] of her Honour’s reasons
for judgment:

27. I agree that it would have been preferable if the Department had made
reference to his failure to company [sic] with judicial orders in the
30 May 2017 letter, as was done with the issue concerning the failure of
disclosure in the incoming passenger cards. However, it was obvious that
the National Police Certiﬁcate contained more information than the
Conviction, Sentence and Appeals report and File note which had been
included with the documents on 23 December 2016. As Counsel for
Mr Stowers conceded, it might be presumed that the National Police
Certiﬁcate contained material adverse to Mr Stowers. The sentencing
Judge’s remarks included with the 30 May 2017 letter were plainly critical
and directed to the issue of compliance. The relevance of Part C of the
Direction had been drawn to his attention in more than one place in the
materials given to Mr Stowers on 23 December 2016. It is clear from
cl 13.1(2)(b) and 13.1.2(2)(b) of the Direction that the likelihood of
re-offending would be taken into account and both the National Police
Certiﬁcate and the sentencing remarks went to that issue.

For these reasons, the primary judge dismissed Mr Stowers’ judicial review
application.

The appeal
Mr Stowers, who was represented by the same counsel in the appeal as
below, contended that the primary judge had erred in rejecting his procedural
unfairness case. His sole ground of appeal is as follows (without alteration):

1. The Primary Judge erred in failing to ﬁnd that the Respondent made a
jurisdictional error by denying the Appellant procedural fairness.

Particulars
(i) On 30 May 2017 the Respondent sent to the Appellant a letter
informing the Appellant that the Respondent had information
which may be taken into account when making the decision
whether to revoke the decision to cancel his visa under s.501CA of
the Migration Act 1958, including a National Police Certiﬁcate
dated 19 December 2016. The Respondent invited the Appellant to
comment on the information.
(ii) The Respondent failed to put the Appellant on notice of the
potential adverse effect of the National Police Certiﬁcate.
(iii) The Respondent relied expressly in making the decision on the
Appellant’s “convictions for breaches of judicial orders and
non-custodial dispositions” in causing the Respondent to “pause in
accepting unquestioningly that [the Appellant] will not reoffend if
returned to the community”: [44] of the Respondent’s decision
record.
(iv) The adverse inference drawn by the Respondent from the
information in his possession, including the National Police
Certiﬁcate, was not an obvious inference, or a conclusion

189
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

32

33

34

obviously open on the known material. The Appellant was denied
an opportunity to comment on the information in the Respondent’s
possession. The denial of procedural fairness may have affected the
outcome of the Respondent’s consideration of the exercise of
power under s.501CA(4).

Appellant’s submissions summarised
The appellant acknowledged that the Assistant Minister was not obliged to
provide a “running commentary” prior to making his non-revocation decision
(citing SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs (2006) 228 CLR 152 (SZBEL) at [48]). He submitted, however, that
procedural fairness principles obliged the Assistant Minister to put him on
notice of the potential adverse effect of the National Police Certiﬁcate in
relation to the Assistant Minister’s ﬁnding at [44] of his statement of reasons
that his breaches of judicial orders and noncustodial dispositions displayed a
disregard for judicial orders. He emphasised that this amounted to a ﬁnding
about his personal characteristics, which ﬁnding was signiﬁcant in the Assistant
Minister ultimately concluding that there is an ongoing likelihood that the
appellant would reoffend. Mr Stowers submitted that it was not obviously open
on the materials provided to him (including the National Police Certiﬁcate and
the remarks of the Local Court and District Court), that the Assistant Minister
might make an adverse ﬁnding by reference to these materials that he had a
“disregard for judicial orders”.

Assistant Minister’s submissions summarised
The Assistant Minister defended the primary judge’s decision. He placed
particular emphasis on the signiﬁcance of Direction 65 which, he submitted,
made plain that the appellant’s criminal record and his risk of reoffending were
critical issues for decision (referring to cll 13(2)(a), 13.1, 13.1.1 and 13.1.2 of
the Direction). The Assistant Minister submitted that the appellant had been
alerted to the adverse nature of the National Police Certiﬁcate by Direction 65,
the sentencing remarks in the Local Court and the District Court on appeal, as
well as “the apparent nature of the power and common sense”.

Consideration and determination
It was common ground that procedural fairness requirements applied to a
decision made under s 501CA(4). It was also common ground that the statutory
requirement under s 501CA(3)(a)(ii) to provide “particulars of relevant
information” only applied to information which the Minister considered was
information which would be the reason or part of the reason for making the
original decision to refuse to grant or to cancel a visa. It was not disputed that
this statutory provision is inapplicable to the separate and subsequent decision
under s 501CA(4) whether or not to revoke the original decision. It is
appropriate, therefore, to focus on the requirements of procedural fairness in the
particular circumstances of this case.
There is the following helpful statement of relevant general principles
concerning procedural fairness in Snedden v Minister for Justice (2014) 230
FCR 82 at [175]-[178] per Middleton and Wigney JJ:

175. There is no dispute that Mr Snedden was entitled to procedural fairness at
the s 22 stage of the extradition process: Santhirarajah at [324]. In general
terms
that
means
the
Minister
was
relevantly
obliged
to
inform
Mr Snedden of the case against him and provide him with a reasonable

190
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

35

36

37

38

opportunity to answer it: Minister for Immigration v Bhardwaj (2002) 209
CLR 597 at [40]. Mr Snedden was entitled to be made aware of, and have
the opportunity to address, the critical issues or factors on which the
decision was likely to turn, as well as any adverse information that was
credible, relevant and signiﬁcant to the decision to be made: Kioa v West
(1985) 159 CLR 550 (Kioa) at 587 (Mason J) and 629 (Brennan J);
Applicant VEAL/2002 v Minister for Immigration (2005) 225 CLR 88
(VEAL) at [15].
176. That is not to say that a decision-maker is necessarily required to disclose
to a person affected by the decision every piece of information that the
decision-maker has or might consider: Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v SZQHH (2012) 200 FCR 223 (SZQHH) at [30]. Nor is a
decision-maker necessarily required to disclose issues in respect of which
the person is already on notice or information the substance of which is
already known to the person: SZQHH at [30]; Brock at [22]. Whilst a
decision-maker is required to advise of any adverse conclusion which has
been arrived at which would not obviously be open on the known material,
there is no obligation for the decision-maker to expose mental processes or
provisional views: Commissioner of ACT Revenue v Alphaone Pty Ltd
(1994) 49 FCR 576 (Alphaone) at 592.
177. The rules of procedural fairness do not have an immutably ﬁxed content:
Assistant Commissioner Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd (2013) 295 ALR 638
at
[156]. There
are
no
concrete
rules
as
to
what
procedures
a
decision-maker must employ to provide procedural fairness in any
particular case. What will be both sufficient and necessary to ensure a fair
hearing in any given case will depend on, and vary with, the context in
which a decision-maker acts, including any statutory or regulatory
requirements or considerations: SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs (2006) 228 CLR 152 (SZBEL)
at [26], [29]; Saeed v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (2010) 241
CLR 252 (Saeed) at [19]-[20]; SZQHH at [26]; see too Re Minster for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex Parte Miah (2001) 206 CLR 57
at [30]-[32]. The content of procedural fairness is ﬂexible and adaptable to
the circumstances of the particular case (Saeed at [18]) and must be
approached on the basis of what is reasonable (Kioa at 627) and necessary
to avoid “practical injustice”: Lam at [37]-[38].
178. As the Full Court (Allsop CJ, Middleton and Foster JJ) in TCL Air
Conditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Castel Electronics Pty Ltd [2014]
FCAFC 83 reminded us at [86]:
86. The required content of fairness in any particular case will depend
on context: constitutional, statutory and human, on all the
circumstances of the case: Salemi v MacKellar (No 2) [1977] HCA
26; 137 CLR 396 at 419. The fairness required relates principally
to the procedure employed in dealing with the party in question.
That may involve the exercise of state or governmental power over
the individual, who may be vulnerable and powerless, or a great
corporation. The terms of any statute will be critical. The common
element is that, generally speaking, the exercise of power should
be fair. That exercise will always have a human context. That is
why, as Gleeson CJ said in Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Lam [2003] HCA 6;
214 CLR 1 at 14, fairness is not an abstract concept, but essentially
practical. The concern of the law is to avoid practical injustice.
Fairness is normative, evaluative, context-speciﬁc and relative.

Their Honours’ summary of general principles includes a reference to the

191
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

39

statement in Commissioner for Australian Capital Territory Revenue v Alphaone
Pty Ltd (1994) 49 FCR 576 (Alphaone) that a decision-maker is required to
advise of any adverse conclusion which has been arrived at which would not
“obviously be open on the known material”. In the current proceeding, the
primary judge referred to that phrase in [23] of her Honour’s reasons for
judgment below, which phrase also appeared in the particulars given by the
appellant in support of his procedural fairness case. The term “obvious” was
also used in [27] of her Honour’s reasons for judgment (see [32] above).
It is important to note, however, that in SZBEL, the High Court (Gleeson CJ,
Kirby, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ), after referring to that statement in
Alphaone, emphasised the danger of a binary approach in applying the
“obviously open” test:

29. No submission was made on behalf of either the appellant or the Minister
that the existence or content of the obligation to accord procedural fairness
was directly affected by any provision of the Act. Rather, the argument
proceeded, for the most part, by reference to what had been said by the
Full Court of the Federal Court in Alphaone. The Full Court (Northrop,
Miles and French JJ) said:

Where the exercise of a statutory power attracts the requirement for
procedural fairness, a person likely to be affected by the decision is
entitled to put information and submissions to the decision-maker in
support of an outcome that supports his or her interests. That
entitlement extends to the right to rebut or qualify by further
information, and comment by way of submission, upon adverse
material from other sources which is put before the decision-maker.
It also extends to require the decision-maker to identify to the
person affected any issue critical to the decision which is not
apparent from its nature or the terms of the statute under which it is
made. The decision-maker is required to advise of any adverse
conclusion which has been arrived at which would not obviously be
open on the known material. Subject to these qualiﬁcations
however, a decision-maker is not obliged to expose his or her
mental processes or provisional views to comment before making
the decision in question. (emphasis added)

30. Particular attention was directed in argument in this Court, as it had been
in the courts below, to the Tribunal’s conclusion that the three identiﬁed
elements of the appellant’s story were not “plausible”. Was that a
conclusion “which would not obviously be open on the known material”?
Or was it no more than a part of the “mental processes” by which the
Tribunal arrived at its decision?
31. Stated in this way, the argument seeks to elucidate the content of the
requirements of procedural fairness by setting up a dichotomy. There
are two reasons to exercise considerable care in approaching the
problem in that way. First, it is far from clear that the two categories
that are identiﬁed (conclusions not obviously open on the known
material, and mental processes of decision-making) encompass all
possible kinds of case that may fall for consideration. Secondly, there
is a very real risk that focusing upon these two categories will distract
attention from the fundamental principles that are engaged.
32. In Alphaone the Full Court rightly said:

It is a fundamental principle that where the rules of procedural
fairness apply to a decision-making process, the party liable to be

192
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

40

directly affected by the decision is to be given the opportunity of
being heard. That would ordinarily require the party affected to be
given the opportunity of ascertaining the relevant issues and to be
informed
of
the
nature
and
content
of
adverse
material.
(emphasis added)
(Emphasis added and footnotes omitted.)
In SZBEL, the High Court also emphasised at [25], that what is required by
procedural fairness is a fair hearing, not a fair outcome, citing Brennan J in
Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin (1990) 170 CLR 1 at 35-36. The Court drew
attention to the critical importance of the statutory framework within which a
decision-maker exercises statutory power and that “the particular content to be
given to the requirement to accord procedural fairness will depend upon the
facts and circumstances of the particular case”, citing Mobil Oil Australia Pty
Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1963) 113 CLR 475 at 503-504.
In Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs;
Ex parte Lam (2003) 214 CLR 1, Gleeson CJ emphasised the central role of the
notion of “practical injustice” in procedural fairness principles. His Honour
observed at [37] that:

37. A common form of detriment suffered where a decision-maker has failed
to take a procedural step is loss of an opportunity to make representations.
Attorney-General (Hong Kong) v Ng Yuen Shiu was such a case. So,
according to the majority, was Haoucher v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs. A particular example of such detriment is a case where the
statement of intention has been relied upon and, acting on the faith of it, a
person has refrained from putting material before a decision-maker. In a
case of that particular kind, it is the existence of a subjective expectation,
and reliance, that results in unfairness. Fairness is not an abstract
concept. It is essentially practical. Whether one talks in terms of
procedural fairness or natural justice, the concern of the law is to
avoid practical injustice.
(Emphasis added.)
Justices Gageler and Gordon supported this approach in Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v WZARH (2015) 256 CLR 326 (WZARH)
at [57].
As the brief analysis of relevant caselaw above indicates, it is well settled that
the statutory context, and the particular facts and circumstances, are important
in determining whether or not there has been procedural unfairness. In some
instances, procedural fairness does not require a decision-maker to put to an
affected person every piece of information the decision-maker will consider. It
may be sufficient merely to put the substance of the material to the person (see,
for example, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZQHH (2012) 200
FCR 223).
The underlying purpose of the requirements of notice or disclosure as aspects
of procedural fairness is another important consideration. It is to provide an
opportunity for meaningful participation by the potentially aggrieved person and
to enable the person fairly to respond to adverse matters. As the Full Court
observed in Traill v McRae (2002) 122 FCR 349 (Sackville, Kenny and
Allsop JJ) at [134], what constitutes adequate notice of a matter and when it
should be provided is to be decided by reference to the circumstances of the
case in question and is directed to enabling the affected person “fairly to
respond”. In our view, those observations apply equally to disclosure.

193
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

41

42

43

44

It is also important to bear in mind the need for caution in applying
statements of general principle in this area. As Katzmann J correctly observed in
SZQNO v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2012] FCA 326 at [45], the
context of the particular case in which such statements are made is critical.

The speciﬁc issue which arises in this appeal is whether the disclosure to
Mr Stowers of the terms of Direction 65 and the provision of the materials
described at [15] above (particularly the National Police Certiﬁcate and the
sentencing remarks in both the Local Court and District Court) were adequate to
fulﬁl procedural fairness requirements, as found by the primary judge.

Some guidance on this speciﬁc issue is provided by the Full Court’s decision
in NBNB v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2014) 220 FCR 44
(NBNB). There, several applicants for protection visas who were in immigration
detention had their visa applications refused because, while in immigration
detention, they had participated in a riot and committed a criminal offence. Prior
to the Minister refusing the visa applications, the visa applicants had been
provided with a copy of a policy document (Direction No 55), which contained
the Minister’s directions under s 499 of the Act to decision-makers concerning
matters which had to be taken into account in the exercise of powers under
s 501 of the Act to refuse to grant a visa to, or to cancel the visa of, a person
who does not satisfy the Minister that the person passes the character test. The
Direction was substantially silent on the subject of general deterrence to people
in immigration detention being a relevant consideration, yet that matter was at
the forefront of the Minister’s reasons for refusing the visa applications.

Justice Buchanan gave a separate lengthy judgment in NBNB. His Honour
observed at [150] that although it may be possible to “tease out” of the text of
some parts of Direction 55 a construction which is not inconsistent with a
decision-maker taking general deterrence into account, that did not involve a
fair reading of the policy document or conform to the likely understanding of a
visa applicant. His Honour also rejected the Minister’s contention that diligent
research by the visa applicants might have alerted them to the relevance of
deterrence to others engaging in criminal conduct while in immigration
detention. His Honour said at [156]:

156. In my view, any argument of this kind should be rejected. First, it is an
unsatisfactory and unrealistic response to the position of non-English
speaking refugees who had been detained for a long time and who, it must
be accepted, were each psychologically fragile and anxious about their
detention. Secondly, suppositions of this kind are no substitute for
practical, direct and honest advice to a visa applicant about the
matters which will be relevant to an assessment of their application.
There can be no justiﬁable reason to withhold from a visa applicant in the
situation of the applicants a plain statement, which they might
understand, of the factors critical to the success or failure of their visa
application, and critical to their future.
(Emphasis added.)

The
learned
authors
of Australia’s
leading
text,
Judicial
Review
of
Administrative Action and Government Liability, 6th ed, state at p 545 that the
approach of “practical, direct and honest” advice of the “factors critical” to a
decision provides “a useful general guide to disclosure”. We respectfully agree
but believe that the word “non-misleading” is more appropriate than the word

194
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

45

46

47

48

49

“honest”, noting that there was no evidence of dishonesty in NBNB or here.
“Honesty” on the part of those administering legislation should be assumed.
In a separate joint judgment in NBNB, Allsop CJ and Katzmann J expressed
agreement with Buchanan J’s reasons for concluding that the visa applicants
had been denied procedural fairness. Their Honours stated at [3]:

3. We agree with Buchanan J (and with his reasons) that each applicant was
denied procedural fairness. None was told about the central place of
deterrence as an issue or likely issue in the decision to be made. Given
what each was provided with by way of material as to what he was invited
to address, each was, to a degree, led away from, or at least left
uninformed about, the likely central consideration of deterrence. In one
sense it can be said that each was (no doubt unintentionally) misled. In all
the circumstances referred to by Buchanan J, we think that it was unfair on
each applicant for the Minister to make the decision for the reasons given
without giving each an opportunity to be heard on the question of
deterrence.

Chief Justice Allsop and Katzmann J made the following additional
observations in NBNB which are apposite to this appeal:

5. How unfairness is revealed or demonstrated in any particular case will
depend on the circumstances. Generally speaking, if a person is not
informed of an important aspect of a case he or she has to meet, subject to
considerations of the kind discussed in Stead v State Government
Insurance Commission [1986] HCA 54; 161 CLR 141, namely whether the
denial of procedural fairness could not possibly have affected the outcome,
unfairness and practical injustice will have been demonstrated: Tuncok v
Minister [2003] FCA 1069 at [34] (per Hely J) approved in Dagli v
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs [2003]
FCAFC 298; 133 FCR 541 at 557 [91]. Here, there is no reason to think
that meaningful submissions could not have been put about deterrence,
perhaps raising the very kinds of issues to which we referred in NBMZ
at [28]-[31]. Further, there is no basis to think that any such submissions
could not have been of signiﬁcance to the Minister’s decision, especially
in the case of NBNB …
NBNB turned on the failure to put the applicants on notice that general
deterrence was a relevant consideration or issue in determining whether to grant
or refuse them a visa. There was no clear or explicit mention of that matter in
Direction No 55, nor were the applicants otherwise put on notice of its potential
relevance.
The relevant issue in the appeal here is different and more nuanced.
Mr Stowers was put on notice by the relevant terms in Part C of Direction 65
that any “serious conduct” on his part as deﬁned in the Direction, as well as any
criminal conduct, was potentially relevant to the primary consideration of
protecting the Australian community. Five months after Mr Stowers’ attention
was drawn to the potential relevance of Part C, he was provided with additional
documentary material and was told that it might be taken into account. The
central issue in this appeal is whether it was procedurally unfair not to give
Mr Stowers greater speciﬁcation of that additional material (apart from that
relating to the Incoming Passenger Cards) which put him on notice as to which
parts of that material might be relied upon in ﬁnding that he had engaged in
“serious conduct” and that this might be relied upon in refusing his revocation
request.

195
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

50

51

52

Notwithstanding the different facts and circumstances between NBNB and
this proceeding, we respectfully consider that Buchanan J’s approach at [156] of
NBNB (with which Allsop CJ and Katzmann J agreed) provides a helpful
benchmark for assessing whether there was procedural unfairness here (while
also giving effect to the other relevant general principles described above). For
the following reasons, we consider that Mr Stowers was not given practical,
direct and non-misleading advice about the “factors critical” to the Assistant
Minister’s revocation decision.

First, in the particular facts and circumstances of this case, more was required
of the Assistant Minister to put Mr Stowers on notice of the basis upon which
the Assistant Minister might conclude that his “convictions for breaches of
judicial orders and noncustodial dispositions” displayed a “disregard for judicial
orders” and might be relied upon to refuse his revocation request. It is true that
Mr Stowers’ attention was speciﬁcally drawn to the relevance of Part C of
Direction 65, and that, accordingly, Mr Stowers was on notice that a primary
consideration was the protection of the Australian community from criminal or
other “serious conduct”. This concept was deﬁned in Annex B as including
“involvement in activities indicating contempt or disregard for the law”.
Importantly, however, at the same time as he was given a copy of that Direction,
Mr Stowers was given the State Certiﬁcate which recorded some of his
convictions. It contained no information relating to any conduct by Mr Stowers
which might be viewed as “involvement in activities indicating contempt or
disregard for the law” within the deﬁnition of “serious conduct” in the
Direction. A person in Mr Stowers’ shoes would, at that time, reasonably infer
that no other conduct apart from the convictions recorded in the State Certiﬁcate
was potentially viewed as being relevant to the risk of him reoffending and the
risk he posed to the Australian community.

Secondly, ﬁve months later (and well after Mr Stowers had responded to the
Department’s 23 December 2016 letter to which a copy of Direction 65 and the
State Certiﬁcate were attached), Mr Stowers was provided with the National
Police Certiﬁcate and the other material described at [15] above. He was invited
at that time to comment on that information. The invitation letter did not make
any express reference to Direction 65 generally or to Part C speciﬁcally. With
one exception, Mr Stowers was not given any speciﬁcation as to which speciﬁc
parts of the additional information might be relied upon or any indication as to
how that material could be characterised in considering whether to accept or
reject his revocation request. The sole exception relates to the Incoming
Passenger Cards which were included in the material attached to the
30 May 2017 letter. In relation to that matter, the letter made clear that the
matter of potential relevance in relation to those documents was that
Mr Stowers had indicated that he had no criminal convictions. Thus Mr Stowers
was put on sufficient notice that he should comment on that aspect of that
material. The position is different with respect to the other additional
information provided to him at this time.
Thirdly, it was not reasonably apparent on the face of that other additional
information (ie the National Police Certiﬁcate and the remarks of the Magistrate
and District Court Judge) that the contents might be used by the Assistant
Minister in the way that he did to refuse Mr Stowers’ revocation request,
namely with reference to Mr Stowers’ “convictions for breaches of judicial
orders and noncustodial dispositions”. We shall explain why that is so.

196
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

53

54

55

56

(a) As is evident from the extracts of the remarks made by the Magistrate
and the District Court Judge, different views were expressed about
Mr Stowers’ past conduct concerning compliance with judicial orders
and noncustodial dispositions. The District Court Judge said that
Mr Stowers had apparently complied with a s 9 good behaviour bond
and, after referring to the community service orders arising from
Mr Stowers’ “serious driving matters”, his Honour said that he
accepted that Mr Stowers would “try and stay out of trouble in the
future”. This was the context in which the Judge reduced the non-parole
period and made orders and recommendations concerning conditions of
parole. With respect, it is difficult to understand the primary judge’s
reference at [27] of her Honour’s reasons for judgment to the
“sentencing Judge’s remarks” as being “plainly critical and directed to
the issue of compliance”. Her Honour’s use of the term “Judge” can
only be a reference to the District Court Judge and not the Magistrate.
As we have emphasised, the Judge’s remarks were generally favourable
to Mr Stowers on the subject of compliance, at least when contrasted
with those of the Magistrate.

(b) In circumstances where the Magistrate and the Judge expressed
different views on these matters, procedural fairness required the
Assistant Minister to put Mr Stowers on sufficient notice as to which
remarks might be relied upon by the Assistant Minister as providing a
foundation for the ﬁndings made in [44] of his statement of reasons. It
would have been reasonable for Mr Stowers to have assumed at the
relevant time that the Assistant Minister was likely to give more weight
to pertinent remarks made by the Judge on appeal if they were
inconsistent with those at ﬁrst instance by the Magistrate. Although the
Judge conﬁrmed the Magistrate’s convictions and sentences, his
Honour reduced the non-parole period and imposed a series of
conditions to help Mr Stowers “work with [his] issues”, both in and out
of custody, including that he be of good behaviour when he is
conditionally released on parole. These matters, together with the
Judge’s remarks outlined in (a) above, reveal that the Judge was less
critical and more optimistic than the Magistrate with respect to
Mr Stowers’ compliance history and likely future compliance.

(c) In circumstances where the State Certiﬁcate contained no information
relating to Mr Stowers’ “convictions for breaches of judicial orders and
noncustodial dispositions”, the reference to those matters in [44] of the
Assistant Minister’s statement of reasons must refer to the contents of
the National Police Certiﬁcate, presumably including the references to
the s 9 bond, the community service order and Mr Stowers’ failure to
appear
in
accordance
with
bail
conditions.
In
the
particular
circumstances here, procedural fairness required that Mr Stowers’
attention be drawn speciﬁcally to those matters if they were to be relied
upon as constituting “serious conduct” to refuse his revocation request
because:
(i) the Assistant Minister took a different view of their
signiﬁcance when compared with other remarks of the
District Court Judge. It is not suggested that it was not open
to the Assistant Minister to take a different view, but the

197
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

issue here is whether there was compliance with procedural
fairness before the Assistant Minister came to that different
view;
(ii) the failure to particularise the matters which underpinned the
Assistant Minister’s reliance on Mr Stowers’ convictions for
breaches of judicial orders and noncustodial dispositions is
highlighted by way of contrast with the fact that, at the same
time, Mr Stowers was provided with adequate notice as to
what
inferences
could
potentially
be
drawn
from
the
Incoming Passenger Cards, which also formed part of the
foundation for the adverse conclusion reached by the
Assistant Minister in [44] of his statement of reasons; and
(iii) even to this day, it is unclear which particular “convictions
for breaches of judicial orders and noncustodial dispositions”
the Assistant Minister had in mind when he adopted [44] of
his statement of reasons. Procedural fairness required those
matters to be particularised so that Mr Stowers could fairly
respond if he wished to do so (see further [58] below).
Fourthly, we consider that there was practical injustice in the circumstances
here. As Gageler and Gordon JJ stated in WZARH at [60], where the procedure
adopted by an administrative decision-maker fails to afford a fair opportunity to
be heard, “a denial of procedural fairness is established by nothing more than
that failure”, and relief will follow unless it can be shown that the failure did
not deprive the person of the possibility of a successful outcome. Their Honours
emphasised that the practical injustice in such a case “lies in the denial of an
opportunity which in fairness ought to have been given”.
If practical, direct and non-misleading advice — or more direct notice — had
been given to Mr Stowers about the particulars of the matters referred to by the
Assistant Minister in [44] of his statement of reasons, Mr Stowers would have
had an opportunity to respond and possibly explain the circumstances relating to
each of those matters which may, in turn, have caused the Assistant Minister to
give them less or no weight. On the facts presented, no notice — direct or
otherwise — had been given to Mr Stowers as to the information provided to
him exposing a “disregard for judicial orders”. To give but one example,
Mr Stowers may have explained the mitigating circumstances which apparently
attached to his conviction on 26 June 2013 of having failed to appear in
accordance with bail, which resulted in him being convicted with no other
penalty imposed. As Steward J said recently in Splendido v Assistant Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection (No 2) [2018] FCA 1158 at [32]:

32. For similar reasons, I am not satisﬁed that the convictions which appear to
record an indifference to the rule of law, provide a basis for the ﬁnding
concerning the “likelihood” that the applicant will re-offend in a way that
creates a risk of harm to the Australian community. The applicant was
convicted in 2011 of failing to answer bail, in 2012 of being in breach of a
suspended sentence and in 2015 of persistent contravention of a family
violence order. The applicant also ignored the warning from the
Department. These are all very serious matters. But we know nothing
about the circumstances leading to each conviction, and as to why the
warning was ignored. There may, or may not have been, mitigating
circumstances which could have rationally affected the Minister’s decision
about the likelihood of harm. Again, the bare recital of conviction and

198
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[(2018)

57

58

sentence in and of itself, and whether taken individually or cumulatively
with the other offences, did not rationally support or not support, the
Minister’s ﬁnding about the risk of harm.
His
Honour’s
observations
were
not
directed
to
procedural
fairness
requirements, but rather to other grounds giving rise to jurisdictional error. The
observations serve, however, to highlight the materiality of the loss of
Mr Stowers’ opportunity to comment on matters which were signiﬁcant to the
Assistant Minister’s decision and about which he had not been given sufficient
prior notice.
Fifthly, although we have preferred to apply Buchanan J’s approach in NBNB
to the particular facts and circumstances here, we consider that the same
outcome would be arrived at under the Alphaone “obviously open” test which is
summarised in [38]-[40] above, and by reference to the High Court’s
observations in SZBEL concerning the danger of a binary approach in applying
that test.
Finally, an issue was raised by the Court during the hearing as to whether a
person’s individual characteristics or personal traits had to be taken into account
in determining the proper content of procedural fairness requirements owed in
respect of that person. Both parties ﬁled brief supplementary submissions on
that issue. It is unnecessary, however, to determine the issue for the purposes of
disposing of the appeal. No individual characteristic or personal idiosyncrasy of
Mr Stowers has ﬁgured in the above analysis as to why, with respect, the
primary judge erred in rejecting his procedural unfairness complaint.
Conclusion
For these reasons, the appeal should be allowed. The orders made on
11 April 2018 should be set aside. Mr Stowers’ request for revocation should be
remitted to the respondent for reconsideration according to law. The respondent
must pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal and of the proceeding below, as
agreed or assessed.

Appeal allowed

Solicitors for the respondent: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers.
ROBERT SIZE

199
265 FCR 177]
STOWERS v MNR FOR IMMIGRATION (The Court)

59

60

61