# Chapter 3

The company as a separate legal entity 3.05 Introduction 3.10 The separate legal entity doctrine

## 3.10.05 The importance of Salomon’s Case 3.15 The adoption of Salomon’s Case

3.25 Common law contexts in which the separate legal entity doctrine may not apply

## 3.25.05 Evasion of a legal obligation

## 3.25.10 Fraud
## 3.25.15 Agency
3.30 Statutory inroads into the separate legal entity doctrine 3.35 Corporate groups 3.40 Corporate liability for civil and criminal wrongs 3.45 Corporate liability in criminal law

## 3.45.05 Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth)

## 3.45.10 Vicarious liability 3.50 Corporate liability in tort

## 3.50.05 Policy considerations with corporate liability in tort 3.55 Summary

In this chapter, we explore in detail two key corporate law concepts: the separate legal status of the corporation and limited liability. We discuss limitations and inroads into these concepts, as well as how the corporation—separate from the people who invest in or run it—can be liable in tort and criminal law. This chapter builds on the themes raised in Chapter 2: the relevance of different theoretical and ideological perspectives on the corporation and its role and purpose in contemporary society. To reiterate why these questions are important: ‘The broad and basic purpose of examining corporate theory is to develop a framework within which we can assess the values and assumptions that either unite or divide the plethora of cases, reform proposals, legislative amendments, and practices that constitute modern corporate law. This law has not sprung up overnight. We need some way of disentangling the differing philosophical and political perspectives from which it has been constructed. Indeed, the great benefit of theoretical inquiry is to reveal the existence of these differences in the first place+ One of the most fundamental principles of corporate law is that, once the requirements for incorporation have been met and a company is registered, it is recognised as its own separate legal entity.2 This means that for legal purposes it exists separate from shareholders, directors and founders and can sue and be sued, enter contracts in its own name, employ staff, borrow money, own property, and engage in most other legal acts that a natural person can do. While companies must clearly act through people (most often directors and managers), the legal obligations that arise from such actions are usually those of the company and not the individuals involved.2 This is reflected in s124(1) of the Corporations Act which states that ‘[a] company has the legal capacity and powers of an individual both in and outside this jurisdiction. A company also has all the powers of a body corporate! As discussed in Chapter 2, this view of the corporation, as a separate legal entity that comes into existence on registration, is consistent with versions of concession theory that see the corporation as having a metaphysical status enabling it to bear rights and duties separately from the individuals who populate it4 The doctrine was famously established in the decision of the House of Lords in Salomon v Salomon & Co Ltd (‘Salomon’s Case’), referred to in Chapter 1.2 This case was an important turning point in corporate law. Prior to the decision in 1897, it was generally assumed that the benefits of incorporation were primarily for use by large joint stock enterprises, rather than small ‘one-person’ companies. By the time of Salomon’s Case, however, most of the companies being incorporated in England were small private companies. The decision in Salomon’s Case was therefore important as it affirmed that incorporation had the same effect and benefits for small companies as for large companies. The case involved a boot manufacturer, Aaron Salomon, who successfully ran his business as a sole trader for over 30 years. In 1892, he set up a company, A Salomon & Co Ltd, under the Companies Act 1862 (UK) to enable his children to gain an interest in the business and to obtain limited liability. All the requirements of the Act were met, including for there to be seven shareholders: Salomon, his wife, and their five eldest children (each granted one share in the company). Salomon was appointed the managing director of the company, and two of his sons were appointed directors. The company, A Salomon & Co Ltd, then purchased the boot manufacturing business from Salomon in exchange for £1,000 cash, £10,000 in debentures, 20,000 fully paid shares and the payment of business debts worth £8,000. The effect of this arrangement was that the business was now owned by the company, with Salomon becoming a secured creditor, the controlling shareholder (with 20,001 shares) and the company’s managing director. Not long after incorporation, there was an economic downturn and the boot manufacturing industry suffered severely as a result. To enable the business to survive, Salomon took a personal loan for £5,000 from a man named Mr Broderip. Salomon then granted Broderip an interest (via a mortgage) in his debentures, with the result that Broderip became the legal owner of the debentures and Salomon the beneficial owner. Despite the loan, the company was unable to pay its debts (including interest on the debentures) and was put into liquidation. At that point, the assets and business of the company were worth about £6,000. It also had a debt of £5,000 that it owed to Broderip, which was repaid. The issue then became how the remaining £1,000 was to be allocated. Salomon, relying upon his interest in the debentures, claimed the amount as a secured creditor. This left the unsecured creditors, who were owed approximately £1,1000, without payment. The liquidators objected to this payment to Salomon on the basis that the company was really a‘one-person company’ and therefore Salomon should not be entitled to be paid before genuine trade creditors. At first instance, Vaughan Williams J found for the liquidator on the basis that the company was Salomon’s agent or a’mere alias’ for him The effect of this decision was, that as principal, Salomon had to indemnify the company for all its business and liabilities. On appeal, the Court of Appeal also held for the liquidator on the basis that the company was acting as a trustee and holding the business on trust for Salomon. This finding also meant that Salomon needed to pay the company the amount owing to the trade creditors. Both the first instance and the Court of Appeal decisions reflected the concerns of the time that the ‘one-person’ company was an abuse of the corporate form. In Lindley LJ’s opinion, although the company had the required number of shareholders, ‘six of them are members simply in order to enable the seventh himself to carry on business with limited liability? As such, the incorporation of the company was nothing more than‘an instrument for cheating honest creditors’1° Lopes LU, in the Court of Appeal, was even more direct in his criticism of this practice. He stated: It never was intended that the company ... should consist of one substantial person and six mere dummies, the nominees of that person, without any real interest in the company. The Act contemplated the incorporation of seven independent bona fide members, wha had a mind and a will of their awn and were not the mere ninnets of an individnal wha adanting the machinery of the Act profits, there is nothing in that that I can see contrary to the true intention of the Act of 1862, or against public policy, or detrimental to the interests of creditors.43 The Lords criticised the lower courts for focusing on the purpose for which the company was incorporated, stating that the motives of the persons incorporating the company were irrelevant. According to Lord Halsbury LC: [The lower courts] have been struck by what they have considered the inexpediency of permitting one man to be in influence and authority the whole company; and, assuming that such a thing could not have been intended by the Legislature, they have sought various grounds upon which they might insert into the Act some prohibition as a result4 Instead, the House of Lords considered that the words of the statute were clear and that it was the intention of Parliament to allow seven or more persons to register a company ‘whatever may have been the ideas or schemes of those who brought it into existence’!5 Salomon’s control of the company was completely consistent with what the statute allowed him to do and did not provide evidence of fraud or misconduct that justified making him liable for the debts of the company. As Lord McNaughton clearly stated: I cannot understand how a body corporate thus made ‘capable’ by statute can lose its individuality by issuing the bulk of its capital to one person, whether he be a subscriber to the memorandum or not ... Nor are the subscribers as members liable, in any shape or form, except to the extent and in the manner provided by the Act. That is, I think, the declared intention of the enactment. The effect of this decision was that any debts owed by the company to the secured creditors (including Salomon) had to be paid first12 Once this was done, due to the shortage of funds remaining, none of the unsecured creditors were paid on the company’s winding up.

## 3.10.05 The importance of Salomon’s Case

As indicated above, the House of Lords in Salomon’s Case recognised the separate legal status of a company, even in circumstances where it was incorporated to take over the business of a sole trader.!8 Although one of the key drivers for the development of the corporate form was to enable collective or group enterprises (discussed in Section 3.25 below), Salomon’s Case made it clear that the legal status of the company was equally available to large and small companies. As Lord McNaughton noted, it did not matter whether most of the people involved in a company were nominee or ‘dummy’ shareholders or directors as ‘[w]hen the memorandum is duly signed and registered ... the subscribers are a body corporate’!2 The decision in Salomon’s Case confirmed that individuals could legitimately minimise their personal risk using the corporate form. The idea that a person's liability could be limited to the amount they had promised or contributed to the capital of a company was not new at the time Salomon’s Case was decided. As discussed in Chapter 1, members of unincorporated joint stock companies were already limiting their liability for the debts of a company via deeds of settlements and provisions in contracts with third parties. However, there was some debate at the time about whether limited liability should be available to small companies. Salomon’s Case confirmed that the benefits of limited liability could be available to anyone who conducted their business through the corporate form. This meant that Salomon and his family, as the shareholders in the company, could not be called upon to contribute to the debts of the company beyond any amount they owed on their shares. This principle is now reflected in s 516 of the Corporations Act, which provides that a member need not contribute to the company more than the amount (if any) unpaid on the shares that they own. For example, if one or more persons buy 100 $1 shares in a company, but at the time they only pay 50 cents towards the cost of each share, the maximum they can later be called upon to contribute to the company is the remaining 50 cents per share ($50). Similarly, in a company limited by guarantee, the liability of members is limited to the amount they promise to contribute via a guarantee to the capital of the company.22 Limited liability is now widely accepted as one of the most foundational principles of corporate law." It allows one or more persons to set up a company without incurring personal liability for the legitimate debts of the company beyond the price of their shares.22 This feature gives the company a significant advantage over other business structures such as the partnership or trust, where the individuals involved can be liable for all the debts of the business. The effect of limited liability is often justified by its economic benefits, including encouraging people to invest in companies, enabling risk-taking by those running the company, decreasing costs to shareholders in monitoring the actions of corporate managers, and encouraging shareholders to diversify their investLimited liability is now widely accepted as one of the most foundational principles of corporate law." It allows one or more persons to set up a company without incurring personal liability for the legitimate debts of the company beyond the price of their shares.22 This feature gives the company a significant advantage over other business structures such as the partnership or trust, where the individuals involved can be liable for all the debts of the business. The effect of limited liability is often justified by its economic benefits, including encouraging people to invest in companies, enabling risk-taking by those running the company, decreasing costs to shareholders in monitoring the actions of corporate managers, and encouraging shareholders to diversify their investments. Indeed, it is commonly argued that the challenges created for creditors through the effect of limited liability are less than the difficulties that would be created for shareholders if there was unlimited liability. As Anderson explains: With unlimited liability, shareholders would be concerned about the risk of losing their personal assets in the event of nonpayment of a debt by the company. ‘The risk could be disproportionate to the return; a small investment could render the shareholder liable for a large corporate debt, yet the return, should the company be successful, would remain small. Shareholders would therefore need to monitor the company’s behaviour. To reduce their exposure to loss of personal assets through many companies, and because monitoring is time-consuming and costly, shareholders would limit their investments to a small number of companies. This would effectively limit investors’ ability to reduce their risk through the diversification of their portfolio of investments, which would in turn drive up their required rate of return.22 As Anderson also notes, under the economic theories of the corporation discussed in Chapter 2 at Section 2.20, limited liability is one of the default rules that make up the standard form contract which is corporate law.4 The aim of such rules is to lower the costs of transacting: Default rules save firms the cost of negotiating and inserting terms into each of the contracts they form. Corporate law rules and norms deal with disputes between corporate stake-holders—managers, shareholders, employees, suppliers, customers and the broader community—and aim to achieve a balance between the objective of shareholder wealth maximisation and the protection of those who may be adversely affected by the activities of the corporation. One consequence of limited liability is that the risk of a company not being able to pay its debts is borne by creditors who are considered to be the ‘cheapest cost avoiders’ because (at least in theory) ‘the contract creditor is able at low cost to determine whether it needs the added assurance of a personal guarantee’26 Risk is ‘externalised’ to creditors who then have recourse to the company’s assets for payments of any debts. To protect themselves, creditors can seek security for their debts (in the form of personal guarantees from directors or major shareholders, or mortgages over company property), include provisions in contracts to ensure repayment, or make inquiries into the finances of the company. In reality, such protections can be of limited value as they are usually only available to financiers and other large creditors. As Anderson notes: [T]here are many obstacles to the ability of creditors to self-protect under a limited liability regime. The contention that creditors can self-protect is based on the theoretical ‘efficient markets’ hypothesis, which assumes that all relevant information is available and [T]here are many obstacles to the ability of creditors to self-protect under a limited liability regime. The contention that creditors can self-protect is based on the theoretical ‘efficient markets’ hypothesis, which assumes that all relevant information is available and immediately digested by the market, leading to accurate assessment and pricing of risk. This does not always happen in practice. Frequently, there is a lack of full or timely information about the risk attaching to an investment or to a debtor company’s financial position. Small closely held companies are more likely to deprive creditors of vital information about solvency than are larger companies with mandated public disclosure or a board well separated from its shareholders. 22 This issue, of a corporation's liability for tort and the risks for involuntary creditors, is discussed further at Section 3.50.05 below. Since the decision in Salomon’s Case, courts have consistently upheld and applied its findings on the separate legal entity principle. The effects of treating a company as separate from its participants include that the company: can sue and be sued in its own name can incur its own obligations in contract, tort, criminal and other law has perpetual succession (meaning that it continues to exist in law despite any change in its members or directors until it is deregistered) can own property can enter contracts with its directors and shareholders. Acase often cited to show the effect of this doctrine is Lee v Lee’s Air Farming Ltd.28 Mr Lee ran a crop-dusting business through the company Lee’s Air Farming Ltd. Lee was the major shareholder of the company, as well as the governing director. Lee was also the sole employee of the company. The company took out workers compensation insurance in relation to Lee. When Lee was killed in a plane crash, his widow claimed compensation under that insurance policy. The insurance company argued that Lee was not a ‘worker’ within the meaning of the workers compensation legislation, which defined a worker as a person‘who. entered into or works under a contract of service ... with an employer’, as he was, in effect, the employer as well. The Privy Council rejected this argument and held that, as the company was a separate legal entity, it could employ Lee under a contract of service. It recognised that a person can have more than one role in relation to a company, including as a shareholder, a director, and an employee. A person can also enter separate contracts with a company in these different roles. In this case, Lee had validly entered a contract of service with the company, and was employed by it, even though he was also the person who controlled and owned the company. As demonstrated by the High Court decision of Andar Transport Pty Ltd v Brambles Ltd,72 the issue of applying the separate legal entity doctrine to ‘one-person’ companies still arises. In this case, the respondent Brambles provided laundry services to hospitals. From 1990 onwards, it was Brambles’ practice to contract out its laundry delivery services to companies which then employed drivers to load, deliver and unload linen. Daryl Wail, who had previously been employed by Brambles, incorporated a company, Andar Transport Pty Ltd, to enter into such a contract with Brambles. Wail was the controlling shareholder, managing director, and nominated ‘driver’ for Andar. In 1993, Wail injured his back while unloading laundry and sued Brambles for negligence. He argued that his injury was sustained using Brambles’ system for unloading trolleys. Brambles argued that the company (Andar), as Wail’s employer, had not taken steps to provide a safe system of work for its driver. On this basis, Brambles argued that Andar should be liable for contributory negligence. While the case primarily involved questions about the interpretation of the indemnity clauses in the contract between Andar and Brambles, it was also necessary for the Court to determine the extent of Andar’s duty to Wail. On this question, the majority of the High Court held that Andar owed Wail a duty of care to provide a safe working environment.22 This was the case even though Wail was the controlling shareholder and director of the company. Quoting Mason JA in Shedlezki v Bronte Bakery Pty Ltd the majority stated: [I]t matters not that the plaintiff had control or the capacity to control the defendant's activities, for the principle that a corporation is a legal entity distinct from the corporators applies with equal force to a company which is ‘a one person’ company:2 Kirby J also emphasised the significance of the separate legal entity doctrine: No party to this appeal argued a challenge so fundamental as to the doctrine in Salomon’ case. It is too late in the day, and inappropriate in this case, to suggest that in law Mr Wail and Andar were the same legal entity. In law, they had different duties and responsibilities 3 The courts have been reluctant to depart from the separate legal entity doctrine due to its fundamental place at the heart of corporate law. The doctrines of separate legal entity and limited liability have been responsible for the corporate form becoming commonplace in all areas of society. In the limited instances where the courts have been willing to disregard or look behind the doctrines (sometimes called ‘piercing the corporate veil’) to make those in control of the company (whether shareholders or directors) liable for the actions or debts of the company, it has usually been because there was evidence that the corporate structure had been set up to perpetuate fraud or to avoid an existing legal obligation. It must be noted, however, that such cases are rare in Australia and most cases that raise such issues are decided on their facts rather than on the basis of any established exceptions to the separate legal entity doctrine4 As Rogers AJA noted in Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd, ‘there is no common, unifying principle, which underlies the occasional decision of the courts to pierce the corporate veil’2* Similarly, Worthington and Spender note that: In the main, corporate law treats the separate legal personality of the corporate device as sacred and its disregard as profane ... the law may disregard or reverse the conferral of legal personality upon the corporate device by piercing the corporate veil. However, this is a rare and momentous judicial or legislative act that is carefully delimited, not least as an option of last resort. Further, the case law is regarded as incoherent and fact-driven, and in many respects emphasises the sanctity of corporate legal personality.2® It is important to remember that just because a person chooses to use a corporate structure to limit their liability for the debts of the business or sets up a company with limited capital (for example, a $1 company), this is not in itself fraud or a sham. As stated by one judge: [T]he great reason why so many people form their businesses into limited liability companies and others invest their money in them is in order that they may be under no personal liability in respect of the transactions of those companies, and that is a perfectly legitimate object 32

## 3.25.05 Evasion of a legal obligation

In cases where a company is established to avoid an existing legal obligation, or to carry on an illegal activity, the courts have been willing to disregard the separate legal status of the company and find that the participants in the company are liable for its actions. A commonly cited example of this is the case of Gilford Motor Co Ltd v Horne (‘Gilford Motor)2® In that case, Mr Horne was employed as managing director of Gilford Motor. There was a provision in his contract that stated that if he left the company, he promised not to compete with it or try to solicit its customers (a restraint of trade clause). After resigning, Horne set up his own company to run a business in competition with Gilford Motor. The shareholders in the new company were Horne, his wife, and one of his business associates. Gilford Motor sued Horne under the restraint of trade clause and argued that the Court should disregard the fact that it was the company that had contacted the customers and find both it and Horne in breach. The Court agreed, finding that the company had been formed for the sole or dominant purpose of avoiding the restraint of trade clause. Therefore, both Horne and the company were in breach and an injunction was issued against both defendants. In the case of Pioneer Concrete Services Ltd v Yelnah Pty Ltd,22 the Court refused to apply the decision in Gilford Motor as there was not enough evidence on the facts that the company had been formed ‘for the sole or for the dominant purpose’ of evading a legal obligation. This exception is still relevant today, as evidenced in the 2013 UK case of Prest v Petrodel Resources Ltd.#° However, as that case clarifies, it will only be in rare circumstances that the courts will allow the corporate veil to be pierced. Prest’s Case arose out of high-profile divorce proceedings between the oil tycoon Michael Prest and his wife Yasmin. It concerned the ownership of a number of residential properties, including the family home, that belonged to companies within the Petrodel Group. This group of companies was wholly owned and controlled by Michael Prest. The question to be decided by the Court was whether the companies could transfer any of the properties to Yasmin Prest, given that in law they belonged to the companies. In a unanimous decision, the Supreme Court allowed the appeal and ordered that the properties be transferred to Yasmin Prest as part of the £17.5 million divorce settlement. It found that, as Michael Prest had contributed money towards the purchase of the properties, they were held by the company for him ona resulting trust. Although, on the facts, it was not necessary to ‘pierce the corporate veil, the Court went on to discuss the circumstances in which the corporate veil could be pierced. In delivering the leading judgment, Lord Sumption stated: ‘Piercing the corporate veil’ is an expression rather indiscriminately used to describe a number of different things. Properly speaking, it means disregarding the separate personality of the company. There is a range of situations in which the law attributes the acts or property of a company to those who control it, without disregarding its separate legal personality. The controller may be personally liable, generally in addition to the company, for something that he has done as its agent or as a joint actor. Property legally vested in a company may belong beneficially to the controller, if the arrangements in relation to the property are such as to make the company its controller's nominee or trustee for that purpose ... But when we speak of piercing the corporate veil, we are not (or should not be) speaking of any of these situations, but only of those cases which are true exceptions to the rule in Salomon v A Salomon & Co Ltd, i.e. where a person who owns and controls a company is said in certain circumstances to be identified with it in law by virtue of that ownership and control.42 Lord Neuberger noted that, in Commonwealth countries, there was little or no consensus on when exceptions to the separate legal entity doctrine apply. As he continued: In Australia, in Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd (1989) 16 NSWLR 549, 567, Rogers AJA in the New South Wales Court of Appeal observed that, ‘there is no common, unifying principle, which underlies the occasional decision of courts to pierce the corporate veil, and that ‘there is no principled approach to be derived from the authorities. In Constitution Insurance Co of Canada v Kosmopoulos [1987] 1 SCR 2, 10, Justice Wilson in the Supreme Court of Canada said that ‘[t]he law on when a court may ... “[lift] the corporate veil” ... follows no consistent principle. The New Zealand Court of Appeal in Attorney-General v Equiticorp Industries Group Ltd (In Statutory Management) [1996] 1 NZLR 528, 541, said that “to lift the corporate veil” provides no guidance as to when it can be used? In the South African Supreme Court decision, Cape Pacific Ltd v Lubner Controlling Investments (Pty) Ltd 1995 (4) SA 790 (A), 802-803, Smalberger JA observed that ‘[t]he law is far from settled with regard to the circumstances in which it would be permissible to pierce the corporate veil’ not a principle. It describes the process, but tort, should be used when they can achieve the same result. Importantly, the Court stopped short of rejecting the concept of piercing the corporate veil. As Lord Neuberger noted: Ihave reached the conclusion that it would be wrong to discard a doctrine which, while it has been criticised by judges and academics, has been generally assumed to exist in all common law jurisdictions, and represents a potentially valuable judicial tool to undo wrongdoing in some cases, where no other principle is available. Accordingly, provided that it is possible to discern or identify an approach to piercing the corporate veil, which accords with normal legal principles, reflects previous judicial reasoning (so far as it can be discerned and reconciled), and represents a practical solution ... I believe that it would be right to adopt it as a definition of the doctrine This decision is important for the detailed discussion it contains on how to approach exceptions to the separate legal entity doctrine and for Lord Sumption’s discussion of the evasion and concealment principles. It is likely to guide Australian courts in future cases on the question of when exceptions to the doctrine exist. However, larger questions still remain. As discussed in Section 3.35 below, many of the corporate scandals of the 2000s led to criticism of the separate legal entity doctrine and to arguments that courts should be able to disregard the doctrine, particularly in the context of group debts or where tort victims are involved.4*

## 3.25.10 Fraud

It has generally been accepted that there is another exception to the separate legal entity doctrine: where the corporate structure is used to perpetuate a fraud or to conceal a fraudulent operation. This was the case in Re Darby,“° where two individuals, Mr Darby and Mr Gyde, registered a company in the Channel Islands called City of London Investment Corporation Ltd (CILIC). They then used CILIC to register an English company, Welsh Slate Quarries Ltd (WSQ), and sought investments in that company from the public via a prospectus. The money raised through the public sale of shares in WSQ was transferred back to CILIC, and then on to Darby and Gyde. When WSQ failed, action was taken against Darby and Gyde to recover the profits they had made from the scam. In law, as CILIC had established WSQ, it was the ‘promoter’ and was liable for any false statements contained in the prospectus. However, the Court was willing to look behind the separate legal nature of CILIC and impose liability for fraud on Darby and Gyde, who it considered were the true promoters of the scheme. This was done on the basis that the corporate structure of CILIC was ‘a mere alias’ for Darby and Gyde, who had, in reality, committed the fraud.42

## 3.25.15 Agency

In Salomon’s Case, both the first instance judge and the House of Lords recognised that a company can act as an agent for its controller. However, as confirmed by the House of Lords, the mere fact that a particular shareholder owns most of the shares in a company does not create an implied agency relationship. For such an agency relationship to exist, the facts must show that the principal (usually a controlling shareholder) has appointed the company to act on its behalf. In particular, it must be clear that the company is entering into contracts and incurring legal obligations on behalf of the principal and not in its own right. Such an argument of implied agency was made in the case of Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd v Birmingham Corporation. In this case, Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd carried on a manufacturing business. It subsequently purchased a waste business and set up a subsidiary company (Birmingham Waste Co Ltd) to run that business. Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd owned 497 of the 502 shares in Birmingham Waste, with the remaining shares held by each of the 5 directors. The local council sought to compulsorily acquire the land on which Birmingham Waste operated—land that was owned by Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd. The relevant legislation provided that Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd was entitled to compensation as the owner of the land; however, Birmingham Waste was only entitled to compensation as the tenant if it held a lease over the premises for more than one year. Birmingham Waste did not have a formal lease to operate on the land. Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd argued that it should still be entitled to compensation for the disruption to Birmingham Waste's business on the basis that the waste business was not separate from the manufacturing business. It argued that an agency relationship existed between the companies, with Birmingham Waste acting as the agent of Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd. In contrast, the council argued it did not need to pay compensation to Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd as Birmingham Waste was a separate company carrying on its own business and it did not have the requisite one-year lease. On the facts, it was shown that the two companies operated with almost identical staff, no independent books or bank accounts, and the income of Birmingham Waste was treated as the income of Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd. On this basis, Atkinson J held that Birmingham Waste was, in law, an agent carrying on Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd’s business. He noted that such an outcome could only be reached by positively answering six questions:

## 3.25.15 Agency

(1) Were the profits of the subsidiary treated as the profits of the parent company? (2) Were the persons conducting the business appointed by the parent company? (3) Was the parent company the head and brain of the trading venture? (4) Did the parent company decide what should be done in the venture and how capital should be allocated? (5) Were the profits of the business due to the parent company’s skill and direction? (6) Was the parent company in effectual and constant control? On the basis of these questions, Atkinson J considered there existed an implied agency relationship between Birmingham Waste and Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd. In so deciding, he did not deny the separate legal status of either company; rather, via the law on agency, he found that the actions of the subsidiary were the actions of the principal. Atkinson J stated that, ‘(i)f either physically or technically the Waste company was in occupation, it was for the purposes of the service it was rendering to the claimant (Smith, Stone & Knight) ... and | think that those facts would make that occupation in law the occupation of the claimants’42 He ordered that compensation be paid to Smith, Stone & Knight Ltd for the disruption to its waste business. Atkinson J’s approach to determining if an agency relationship existed has since been criticised on the basis that control by a parent company of a subsidiary should not, on its own, create an agency relationship? As Rogers AJA has noted, if this were the case, ‘then that conclusion could apply in relation to just about every holding company and fully owned subsidiary and the principle of limited liability in relation to the activities of subsidiaries would be left in tatters’! As a result, the agency argument has rarely been successful in circumventing the separate legal entity doctrine.

## 3.25.15 Agency

Over time, situations have arisen where Parliament has considered it appropriate to make directors and officers liable for the debts of a company. For example, s 588G of the Corporations Act provides that directors are liable for the debts of a company if they continue to trade after the company becomes insolvent. Under s 95A(2) of the Corporations Act, a company is insolvent when it cannot pay its debts as and when they fall due for payment. Section 588G of the Corporations Act is discussed in detail in the context of directors’ duties in Chapter 11 at Section 11.25. The effect of s 588G is to make directors personally liable for a company’s debts if, at the time of the debt, there were reasonable grounds for a director suspecting that the company was or would become insolvent, and the director was or should have been aware of these grounds. Corporate groups are a common feature of many business operations and are discussed extensively in Chapter 4 at Section 4.65.05. In the present context, we consider the special challenges that groups create with the separate legal entity doctrine. Aside from small proprietary companies, most business ventures today are conducted through groups of interrelated corporations. These structures allow businesses to spread their operations, profits and liabilities between different companies, often with taxation advantages. Corporate groups are common where businesses operate in different jurisdictions or offer a range of different services or products. When discussing corporate groups, specific terminology is used. The company at the apex of the group is called the ‘parent’ or ‘holding’ company. The parent company will own enough shares in the other companies to control their management and operations. These other companies are called ‘subsidiaries’ of the parent company, and can be partly or fully owned. It is often argued that, in particular circumstances, corporate groups should be regarded as a single entity in law. These arguments are most strongly advocated where one company within a group becomes insolvent or incurs liability in tort that it cannot meet, or where the same directors manage a number of companies. This is discussed further below at Section 3.50. At common law, these arguments are rejected. Outside any statutory provisions to the contrary (such as s 588V discussed below), the courts will consider that each company in a group is a separate legal entity possessed of its own rights and liabilities. While, in practice, a group of companies is often regarded as one economic entity, this is not the position in law. As noted by Hadden: Businessmen, accountants and investors all think about corporate groups rather than individual companies as the main focus of their activities. Only lawyers and legislators ... cling to the tradition that individual companies are the only proper focus of attention and that corporate groups are no more than simple or complex combinations of individual companies This situation is exemplified in the case of Walker v Wimborne.»4 The facts involved an action by the liquidator of Asiatic Electric Co Pty Ltd (‘Asiatic’) against its three directors: Raymond Wimborne, Pearl Wimborne and David Wimborne. These three individuals were the only directors of several other companies, which they administered as a group together with Asiatic. The group of companies encountered financial difficulties after completing work for Chevron Sydney Ltd on a hotel in Kings Cross. By the end of the work, Asiatic was owed over $100,000 which Chevron was unable to pay. To cover costs within the group, the three directors moved funds between the companies to meet debts as they arose. In particular, they paid three debts owed by other companies from Asiatic funds. When Asiatic became insolvent, the liquidator argued that these payments involved a breach of directors’ duties as the payments were not made in Asiatic’s best interests. The three directors argued in response that they had acted for the benefit of the group of companies, as the payments had prevented some of the other companies from going into liquidation. The High Court rejected the idea that a director can act in the interests of a group of companies and confirmed that directors owed duties to each individual corporate entity that they manage.*= Mason J commented that: [T]he emphasis given by the primary judge to the circumstance that the group derived a benefit from the transaction tended to obscure the fundamental principles that each of the companies was a separate and independent legal entity, and that it was the duty of the directors of Asiatic to consult its interests and its interests alone in deciding whether payments should be made to other companies.=® While this case establishes the legal position in Australia, different arguments were used in the case of DHN Food Distributors Ltd v London Borough of Tower Hamlets to enable companies in a group to be treated as one entity.2 The facts of that case were similar to Smith, Stone & Knight discussed at Section 3.25.15. DHN ran a food distribution business and was the holding company in a group of companies. There were two subsidiary companies that were wholly owned by DHN. One subsidiary company owned the land on which DHN‘s warehouse was located, and the other owned the vehicles used by DHN. The land owned by the first subsidiary was compulsorily acquired by the London Borough Council, and DHN sought compensation for disturbance to its business. ‘These subsidiaries are bound hand and foot to the parent company and must do just what the parent company says ... This group is virtually the same as a partnership in which all the three companies are partners. They should not be treated separately so as to be defeated on a technical point = This decision has been subject to extensive criticism, both by other courts and by academic commentators, for its minimisation of the relationship between parent and subsidiary companies.*2 It was not followed in the Australian cases of Pioneer Concrete Services Ltd v Yelnah Pty Ltd,=2 Dennis Willcox Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation," and State Bank of Victoria v Parry and it is now accepted that the fact that a parent company has control over a subsidiary is not sufficient reason to justify piercing the corporate veil As Rogers AJA noted in Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd,“ such an ar- gument is’entirely too simplistic’®* He continued: ‘The law pays scant regard to the commercial reality that every holding company has the potential and, more often than not, in fact, does, exercise complete control over a subsidiary. In Qintex Australia Finance Ltd v Schroders Australia Ltd£2 Rogers CJ commented on the challenges created by the operation of the separate legal entity doc- trine to corporate groups. He stated: It may be desirable for parliament to consider whether the distinction between the law and commercial practice should be maintained. This is especially the case today when the many collapses of conglomerates occasion many disputes. Regularly, liquidators of subsidiaries, or of the holding company, come to court to argue as to which of their charges bears the liability ... As well, creditors of failed companies encounter difficulty when they have to select from among the moving targets the company with which they consider they concluded a contract. The result has been unproductive expenditure on legal costs, a reduction in the amount available to creditors, a windfall for some, and an unfair loss to others. Fairness or equity seems to have little role to play. Concerns such as these led to amendments to the Corporations Act in 1993 to introduce s 588V.2 This section, while limited to the context of insolvency, is an important inroad into the application of the separate legal entity doctrine as it makes a parent company liable for the debts of a subsidiary where insolvent trading is involved. For liability to attach, there must be reasonable grounds for the parent company to suspect, at the time a debt is incurred by a subsidiary, that the subsidiary company is insolvent. It must also be shown that either the parent company or one or more of its directors were aware, or should have been aware, of those grounds. Despite such reform, concerns over liability within corporate groups remains. As Harris and Hargovan wrote in 2011: ‘The tendency to ignore the separate relationship between each group company, has been a matter of public concern in recent years. Several large corporate collapses (including Ansett, Westpoint and Allco Finance Group), as well as the actions of the James Hardie group in seeking to shelter group assets from tort victims and the Patricks group of companies in seeking to minimise employee entitlements through the use of corporate groups, raise an important question about the use of corporate groups in Australia. Specifically, these developments raise a public concern as to what extent should company law ignore the separate entity status of individual members of a corporate group? This is an issue that is frequently before the courts both in Australia and overseas.2 The fact that a company is a separate legal entity means it can commit and be liable for criminal and civil wrongs. Although a corporation acts through people (usually the board of directors, managers or shareholders), as a juristic person it can attract primary liability for these actions. One of the key ways such liability has been understood is through an analogy with human beings.22 In HL Bolton (Engineering) Co Ltd v TJ Graham & Sons Ltd Lord Denning famously commented: A company may in many ways be likened to a human body. It has a brain and a nerve centre which controls what it does. It also has hands which hold the tools and act in accordance with directions from the centre. Some of the people in the company are mere servants and agents who are nothing more than hands to do the work and cannot represent the directing will or mind. Others are directors and managers who represent the directing mind and will of the company, and control what it does 4 Using this framework, often called the ‘organic theory’ the state of mind of directors and managers can create the mental state of mind of the company. As Lord Denning continued: [In cases where the law requires personal fault as a condition of liability in tort, the fault of the manager will be the personal fault of the company ... So also in the criminal law, in cases where the law requires a guilty mind ... the guilty mind of the directors or managers will render the company itself guilty.= Before discussing this issue in more detail, it is interesting to note that research published in 2016 suggests that the extent of corporate wrongdoing in Australia is significant 26 Drawing on government data published by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC), the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), the Fair Work Ombudsman, the Fair Work Commission, and the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Australia Institute found that: between 2005-15, the ACCC took action against 669 companies: 167 for competition issues, 489 cases to safeguard consumers and in relation to unfair trade issues, and 13 others from mid-2011 to the end of 2015, ASIC concluded 3115 cases against individuals and corporations, of which 2095 (67 per cent) were criminal matters. However, this does not represent the full number of matters resolved by ASIC as it, like most regulators, uses a range of administrative sanctions to resolve cases and reserves litigation for the most serious cases during the period studied, the ATO litigated approximately 400 cases a year against corporations, in addition to a large number of out of court settlements. In 2014-15, corporate settlements raised revenue of $3.5 million every year, approximately 5,000 cases go to court involving organisations (mainly companies) as defendants, and on average around 4,000 of those defendants are found guilty. In 2020, the Australian Law Reform Commission released its report on Australia’s corporate criminal regime.8 It noted the challenges it faced in conducting the review based on the fact that ‘there is a dearth of data relating to corporate crime in Australia, which effectively obscures the extent and nature of such crime, and renders evidence based regulation of corporate conduct difficult’2? It recommended that national policies and principles be developed to enable the collection of information on corporate crime rates, corporate crime victimisation, and corporate enforcement action at both state and federal level £2 As the above discussion indicates, corporate misconduct can take a variety of forms, including tax evasion, market manipulation, consumer protection, unfair trade practices, and breaches of the Corporations Act. Corporations can also be liable for other crimes, including environmental damage, failure to provide safe working conditions, manslaughter, breach of employment conditions, and foreign bribery. The requirement for mens rea, or proof of intent in criminal law, has created problems in the context of the corporation. As a result, many regulatory offences (including many provisions in the Corporations Act) operate as strict liability offences; that is, corporate liability exists without proof of fault Where a corporation is charged with an offence that requires fault, questions arise as to how this can be established. Which directors or managers are the mind’ of the corporation? What if there are different‘states of mind’ between directors and managers, or between some directors and other directors? These questions have been around for a long time. In Pharmaceutical Society v London and Provincial Supply Association Ltd,®2 a case decided before Salomon’s Case, Lord Blackburn considered that a corporation could be guilty of a crime requiring intent. He commented: I do not feel the least difficulty arising from what seems to have troubled some of the learned judges in the court below ... I quite agree that a corporation cannot, in one sense commit a crime—a corporation cannot be imprisoned, if imprisonment be the sentence for the crime; a corporation cannot be hanged or put to death if that be the punishment for the crime; and so, in those senses a corporation cannot commit a crime. But a corporation may be fined, and a corporation may pay damages ... If you could get over the first difficulty of saying that the word ‘person’ here may be construed to include an artificial person, a corporation, I should not have the least difficulty upon the other grounds that have been suggested.82 In Lennard’s Carrying Co Ltd v Asiatic Petroleum Co Ltd,£4 the House of Lords looked to the state of mind of the individuals in control of the company. In Northside Developments Pty Ltd v Registrar-General,£* Dawson J suggested that this approach was an extension of the law of agency, in that it allows any person with actual or implied authority to ‘be regarded not only as the agent of the company, but also as the company itself—an organic part of it’S® In most cases, it will be the directors or managers that are taken to be the mind of the company. For example, in Tesco Supermarkets Ltd v Nattrass,82 the House of Lords noted that corporate managers who had been entrusted with a significant degree of freedom from higher authority could be taken to represent the company’s state of mind. In that case, the company owned a chain of supermarkets. At one store, washing powder was advertised on sale. When the reduced price product was sold out, a store employee put out the same washing powder at the normal price. The following day, a customer tried to buy the item at the reduced price but was told there were no more discount items available and that he had to pay the normal price. Tesco was charged under the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 (UK) for falsely advertising the price of the washing powder. In its defence, Tesco argued that the company had taken all reasonable precautions and exercised all due diligence to avoid the commission of the offence, and that the conduct of the store manager was not the conduct of the corporation. The House of Lords accepted the defence and found that the store manager was not the ‘directing mind’ of the corporation and therefore his conduct was not attributable to it. The corporation had done all it could to enforce the rules regarding advertising. Lord Reid noted that in order for liability to attach to the actions of an individual, they must be acting as the company. He continued: Normally the board of directors, the managing director and perhaps other superior officers of a company carry out the functions of management and speak and act as the company. Their subordinates do not. They carry out orders from above and it can make no difference that they are given some measure of discretion. But the board may delegate some part of their function of management giving to their delegate full discretion to act independently of instructions from them.88 In ABC Developmental Learning Centres Pty Ltd v Wallace,£2 the Victorian Supreme Court acknowledged there are circumstances where the ‘directing will and mind’ theory of corporate attribution is not adequate. In this case, ABC Developmental Learning Centres was part of the ABC group of companies which was successfully prosecuted in the Magistrates Court for breach of the Children’s Services Act 1996 (Vic). The prosecution arose out of a situation in 2003 where a child under the age of three escaped from a childcare centre owned by ABC and wandered into the surrounding streets. While the child was returned unAdopting this approach, Bell J held that the actions of the junior employees could be attributed to the company due to the terms of the offence and the policy objectives of the enabling statute. After considering the nature of the charges brought against ABC, and the policy of the Act, Bell J found that the protection, supervision and care of young children were paramount considerations in the legislation. He held that ‘(a) children’s service proprietor that is a company can only protect children from hazards and supervise them through employees’23 As a result: ‘The terms of the offence and the policy of the legislation are such that the actions of such persons, done within the scope of their work, can be attributed to the company. If their actions do not comply with the standards expressed, it can count as non-compliance for the purposes of a prosecution. As mentioned previously, in April 2019, the federal government commissioned the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) to undertake a review of the corporate criminal responsibility regime.2* The review was in response to recommendations made in the final report of the Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry and the ASIC Enforcement Review Taskforce on the need to strengthen Australia’s corporate criminal liability laws. The terms of reference of the ALRC review were to consider whether, and if so what, reforms are necessary to improve Australia’s corporate criminal liability regime. The ALRC’s final report was tabled in Parliament in August 2020.22 Some of the key findings were that: Corporations are most often prosecuted for relatively minor regulatory offences. Smaller corporations are more likely to be prosecuted than larger corporations. Prosecutors withdraw a significantly higher number of charges against corporations than they withdraw against individuals for corporate crimes, suggesting that existing laws present real difficulties for prosecuting corporations. There is significant complexity in the Commonwealth legislative landscape, with over 3,100 offences across the 25 Commonwealth statutes relevant to corporate misconduct. Existing penalty and sentencing options for corporations are inadequate and often disproportionately affect shareholders, employees and third parties who were not connected with the corporation at the time of the offending.22

## 3.45.05 Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth)

Several of the ALRC’s recommendations related to provisions dealing with corporate liability under pt 2.5 of the Code, located in sch 1 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) (‘Criminal Code’). These provisions replace the concept of the directing will and mind in Australia, and apply to offences within Commonwealth legislation, including offences under the Corporations Act.22 Section 12.1(2) of the Criminal Code states that a body corporate can be found guilty of an offence, including one punishable by imprisonment. In the case of such an offence, the penalty imposed on a corporation will usually be a fine (s 4B). Under s 12.2 of the Criminal Code, the physical element of a criminal offence can be attributed to a company if it is committed by an employee, agent, or officer of the company acting within the actual or apparent scope of their employment or within their actual or apparent authority1° This provision relies on agency principles and is wider than the common law ‘directing will and mind’ principle, as it allows for liability for employees acting within their employment or authority. The ALRC recommended an amendment be made to s 12.2 to simplify its wording so that liability would apply for acts by any person acting at the direction, or with the agreement or consent (express or implied), of an officer, employee, or agent of the body corporate, acting within actual or apparent authority201 Under s 12.3(1) of the Criminal Code, the fault element of an offence can be attributed to a company where it expressly, tacitly or impliedly authorises or permits the commission of the offence. A company is taken to have authorised or permitted the commission of an offence where:

+ the board of directors or a high managerial agent intentionally, knowingly or recklessly carried out the relevant conduct or expressly, tacitly or impliedly
authorised or permitted the commission of the offence. This ground does not apply where the company can show it exercised due diligence to prevent the conduct, authorisation or permission of the high managerial agent;

* acorporate culture existed within the body corporate that directed, encouraged, tolerated or led to non-compliance with the relevant provision; or
* the body corporate failed to create and maintain a corporate culture that required compliance with the relevant provision (s 12.3(2)).

Under s 12.3(6), a‘high managerial agent’ is defined to include an employee, agent, or officer with duties of such responsibility that their conduct may fairly be assumed to represent the body corporate's policy; and ‘corporate culture’ is defined to mean an attitude, policy, rule, course of conduct or practice existing within the body corporate or that part of it in which the relevant activities took place. These provisions have been criticised for being hard to prove, particularly in the context of large corporations. As the ALRC noted: Traditional methods of attribution that look to the directing mind of the organisation in determining corporate fault are more easily proved against smaller corporations. ... Larger corporations often have a greater degree of devolved authority and are structured around divisions and business units (and in multinational companies there may be additional layers of management around regions and countries). Thus, there is no one person who can be said to be directing the operations of the corporation. Organisational hierarchies mean that decisions and their implementation are necessarily separated, not always documented, and often opaque Asa result, the ALRC proposed two options for reform. The first was to replace ‘high managerial agent’ with ‘officer, employee, or agent of the body corporate, acting within actual or apparent authority’!23 The second was to replace s 12.3 with a provision to the effect that, if it is necessary to establish a state of mind, other than negligence, of a body corporate, it is sufficient to show that: (a) one or more officers, employees, or agents of the body corporate, acting within actual or apparent authority, engaged in the relevant conduct, and had the relevant state of mind; or (b) one or more officers, employees, or agents of the body corporate, acting within actual or apparent authority, directed, agreed to or consented to the relevant conduct, and had the relevant state of mind.1% It would be a defence if the body corporate proved that it took reasonable precautions to prevent the commission of the offence.

## 3.45.10 Vicarious liability

Whereas the above discussion relates to direct liability of companies in criminal law, companies can be indirectly liable for the criminal acts of their employees. This is called ‘vicarious liability’ and is based on the similar principle that applies in tort cases that are discussed below. Under vicarious liability, a corporation can be held liable for the acts or omissions of its employees and agents committed within the course of their employment or within the scope of their authority where such liability is clear in the relevant legislation. While the common law does not recognise vicarious liability for criminal offences, such liability can exist under statute in relation to offences of strict or absolute liability, or where the statute demonstrates such an intention. For example, s 769B of the be assumed to represent the body corporate’s policy; and ‘corporate culture’ is defined to mean an attitude, policy, rule, course of conduct or practice existing within the body corporate or that part of it in which the relevant activities took place. multinational companies there may be additional layers of management around regions and countries). ‘Thus, there is no one person who can be said to be directing the operations of the corporation. Organisational hierarchies mean that decisions and their implementation are necessarily separated, not always documented, and often opaque? It would be a defence if the body corporate proved that it took reasonable precautions to prevent the commission of the offence.
## 3.45.10 Vicarious liability

Whereas the above discussion relates to direct liability of companies in criminal law, companies can be indirectly liable for the criminal acts of their employees. This is called ‘vicarious liability’ and is based on the similar principle that applies in tort cases that are discussed below. Under vicarious liability, a corporation can be held liable for the acts or omissions of its employees and agents committed within the course of their employment or within the scope of their authority where such liability is clear in the relevant legislation. While the common law does not recognise vicarious liability for criminal offences, such liability can exist under statute in relation to offences of strict or absolute liability, or where the statute demonstrates such an intention. For example, s 769B of the Corporations Act provides that in relation to offences in ch 7 of the Act (dealing with financial services and markets), ‘conduct engaged in on behalf of a body corporate by a director, employee or agent of the body, within the scope of the person's actual or apparent authority ... is taken ... to have been engaged in also by the body corporate’. Other statutory examples include:

+ 585 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 1987 (Cth), which provides that if a director, employee or agent of the company commits an offence under that Act, the
company is deemed to be liable

+ s 84 of the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth), which imputes to the company the conduct and state of mind of every director, employee or agent of
the company acting within the scope of his or her actual or apparent authority. Acompany can be liable in tort, either through the principle of vicarious liability or through direct liability, where it causes or contributes to injury to a person. Vicarious liability makes an employer (including a company) liable for the acts or omissions of its employees where they were acting within the scope of their employment. In contrast, direct liability can arise in common law or under statute in circumstances where a company itself is liable for the wrong. Examples of torts that companies can commit include negligence, passing off, defamation, injurious falsehood, deceit, conspiracy and breach of statutory duty.

## 3.50.05 Policy considerations with corporate li in tort

One issue that continues to be the subject of debate is the situation where a company that is part of a group of companies is liable for damages in tort but has limited assets to pay the claim.2% We know that the separate legal entity doctrine prevents tort victims from making claims against other companies within the group for any shortfall. However, this can create unfair situations where tort victims—who are, in essence, involuntary creditors—are penalised for the fact that the entity that causes them loss has limited funds, while other companies within the group may have adequate funds to pay the claim. Unlike contract creditors, the involuntary tort creditor has no ability to self-protect against the risk of non-payment by choosing not to deal with that company. If the company is insolvent or unable to compensate the injured person, it is therefore natural for them to look to those behind the company, or to other companies within the group, for payment. This issue arose in Australia in the context of the James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd litigation. James Hardie was one of Australia’s largest corporations and was involved in the mining, manufacture and sale of asbestos products from the early 1920s until 2001, when it moved its headquarters overseas. The company had various subsidiaries that operated the asbestos operations from the 1930s onwards. Throughout the 1970s, it became clear that asbestos was a highly toxic substance. As a result, between 1995 and 2000, the parent company (James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd) began to remove the assets from the subsidiaries, leaving them with most of the asbestos liabilities. A compensation fund was then established to meet the asbestos claims for the next 50 years. In reality, the fund was underfunded and began to run out of money after just two years of operation. This situation caused substantial public outcry in Australia and criticism of the corporate rules (including the separate legal entity doctrine) that allowed the situation to arise. The liability of the board of directors of James Hardie for these actions is discussed in detail in Chapter 11. For now, it is sufficient to note that the case raised questions about whether it was permissible for victims to take action against other companies within a group of companies. The main arguments in favour of limiting the operation of the separate legal entity doctrine were that:

+ unlike other creditors, involuntary tort claimants do not choose to assume the risk of the subsidiary’s insolvency
+ leaving tort claimants to bear the risk of uncompensated loss is economically inefficient as they are not in a position to avoid that risk due to their lack of a
contractual relationship with the company

+ limiting the liability of other companies within a group reduces the deterrence for harmful behaviour in the corporate group context
+ there is an ethical question of whether companies should be able to profit from business operations without bearing the costs of injury.

These questions have not been answered by the courts. In the case of Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd,1°2 Rogers AJA suggested that separate considerations should apply when determining the liability of a parent company for the tortious liability of its subsidiary. In this case, Briggs was employed by a subsidiary company of James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd and, as a result of his work, contracted asbestosis. He sued both the subsidiary and the parent company for negligence. The subsidiary was insolvent and to succeed against the parent company it was necessary for the Court to go behind the separate legal entity doctrine to attribute liability. The New South Wales Court of Appeal was asked to resolve, as a preliminary matter, whether there was sufficient evidence to hold the parent company liable for the acts and omissions of the subsidiary. The Court held that there was and that the question should be determined at trial. Rogers AJA rejected as too simplistic the idea that complete control of the subsidiary by the parent company was on its own sufficient to result in liability being attributed to the parent. However, he did suggest that different considerations might apply where a claim is in tort rather than in contract. He stated: Generally speaking, a person suffering injury as a result of the tortious act of a corporation has no choice in the selection of the tortfeasor. The victim of the negligent act has no choice as to the corporation which will do him harm. In contrast, a contracting party may readily choose not to enter into a contract with a subsidiary of a wealthy parent. The contracting entity may inquire as to the amount of paid up capital and, generally speaking, as to the capacity of the Trine) tnat allowed tne situation to arise. other party to pay the proposed contract debt and may guard against the possibility that the subsidiary may be unable to pay In May 2000, the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee issued a report on liability within corporate groups, in which it rejected the need for reform to the application of limited liability. The arguments put to the Committee opposing reform were that: the interests and profiles of group companies differ significantly reform would create different liability in Australia to overseas jurisdictions the separate legal entity doctrine is an important legal principle that is entrenched within commercial practice allowing companies within groups to operate separately from each other stimulates investment and can aid competition, growth, and development the courts can analyse the circumstances of each case and, in specific instances, find exceptions to the doctrine making a parent company liable for the torts of a subsidiary company could weaken the economic foundation of all the other companies in the group if the tort claims were large or numerous, they could destroy an entire corporate group comprising vastly differing interests the imposition of such liability may give rise to increased litigation, particularly against larger corporate groups.122 This chapter explored two of the most important corporate law concepts: the separate legal entity doctrine and limited liability. It is important to remember that although these two doctrines operate to make the corporation a highly desirable and popular legal structure for conducting business, they are distinct ideas, with limited liability benefiting shareholders and the separate legal entity doctrine applying to the company. Furthermore, these concepts, and in particular the separate legal entity doctrine, have provoked much discussion and criticism from both the judiciary and academia. Exceptions to the separate legal entity doctrine are rare and, after Prest’s Case are likely to remain so. Akey issue is the operation of the separate legal entity doctrine in the context of corporate groups. Here, the courts have adopted a strict approach, even where it has been argued (as in the context of tort victims) that injustice is caused by maintaining the separate legal status of each entity within the group. Finally, this chapter discussed how a company can be liable in criminal law and tort. In the former context, the application of the ‘directing will and mind’ concept still operates under common law, unless it has been replaced by statute as in the case of the Criminal Code 1995 (Cth). In tort, a company can be liable through vicarious liability or directly where the company has committed the wrong.
