CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST * IT is the thesis of this essay that all powers granted to a corporation or to the management of a corporation, or to any group within the corporation, whether derived from statute or charter or both, are necessarily and at all times exercisable only for the ratable benefit of all the shareholders as their interest appears. That, in consequence, the use of the power is subject to equitable limitation when the power has been exercised to the detriment of such interest, however absolute the grant of power may be in terms, and however correct the technical exercise of it may have been. That many of the rules nominally regulating certain specific uses of corporate powers are only outgrowths of this fundamental equitable limitation and are consequently subject to be modified, discarded, or strengthened, when necessary in order to achieve such benefit and protect such interest; and that entirely new remedies may be worked out in substitution for or supplemental to existing remedies. And that, in every case, corporate action must be twice tested: first, by the technical rules having to do with the existence and proper exercise of the power; second, by equitable rules somewhat analogous to those which apply in favor of a cestui que trust to the trustee's exercise of wide powers granted to him in the instrument making him a fiduciary. The question is not academic. Its solution in the sense suggested would give greater flexibility to corporate managements in certain respects. It would permit them, when the action is actually necessary or beneficial, to do things in the doing of which

   * In preparing this article, the author is indebted for assistance and suggestions
to Messrs. Irving H. Dale, David H. Holzman, Wilbur Stammler, William J. Hoff, Hugh R. Dowling, Abraham Marcus, Felix S. Cohen and David Orlikoff, all students in the Columbia Law School. The theory herein expressed was suggested by the writer in CASES AND MATERIALS IN THE LAW OF CORPORATION FINANCE (I930) 62. The need of some synthesis to harmonize the many apparently individual rules in the law of corporations was likewise suggested by the writer in a paper, Organization of the Law of Corporation Fitance, read before the National Association of American Law Schools in December, 1930, and in course of publication in the University of Tennessee Law Review for May, 193I.


   (i) The rule that the incoming shareholder must make a contribution
which in good conscience entitles him to participate to the extent allowed by his shares.

The requirement that stock be paid for has two distinct bases in American law. One line of thought required that stock be paid for in order to supply a fund available for the protection of creditors. With this ideology we are not at present concerned. The second line was definitely based on the theory that every shareholder had an interest in the payment made by every other shareholder upon the issuance of his stock.' Mathematically 1 The cleanest statement of this rule is found in Luther v. Luther Co., ii8 Wis. II2, I23, 94 N. W. 69, 72 (I903), the court saying: " For the purposes of the present case, it is not necessary to consider the unissued stock otherwise than as mere property, over which the powers of the directors are the same as over any other


3 Alabama Nat. Bank v. Halsey, I09 Ala. i96, ig SO. 522 (1895); Jones Drug Co. v. Williams, I39 Miss. I70, I03 SO. 8IO (I925); Southwestern Tank Co. v. Morrow, II5 Okla. 97, 24I Pac. I097 (I925); Kanaman v. Gahagan, iii Tex. i70, 230 S. W. I4I (I92I); see (I926) io MINN. L. REv. 536; (I930). 39 YALE L. J. 706, 712. But it does not follow that a note so taken is necessarily unenforceable as against the maker, which has given rise to confusion in the result of these cases. See Pacific Trust Co. v. Dorsey, 72 Cal. 55, I2 Pac. 49 (1887); Goodrich v. Reynolds, Wilder & Co., 3I Ill. 490 (I863); German Mercantile Co. v. Wanner, 25 N. D. 479, I42 N. W. 463 (1913); Schiller Piano Co. v. Hyde, 39 S. D. 74, I62 N. W. 937 (I9I7). 4 See the discussion in Sohland v. Baker, i5 Del. Ch. 43I, I4I Atl. 277 (I927). For a case in which the facts and the statute forced a decision that even a secured note was not property, see Walz v. Oser, 93 N. J. Eq. 280, ii6 Atl. i6 (I922).


Accordingly the quality of the property was referred back to the question of valuation; and in respect to patents this is generally the rule. It will be noticed that this is a less rigid rule, permitting more latitude, and permitting protection of the interests actually involved. A contract for the services of an outsider to help publish a history has been held not " property " within the meaning of these statutes.6 Goodwill -well understood as property in other fields of law, and differing from tangible property only in that it is more difficult to reduce to definite appraisal-has been treated both ways; one case disallowed it completely; 7 others left the question open for the determination of the possibility of a demonstrable valuation.8 Once in the valuation field, judicial modification of liberty of action becomes even more striking. Both of the principal rules on the subject -the rule that stock may be issued for property at its " absolute value," as over and against the rule that stock may be issued for property upon such valuation as reasonable business men would approve under the circumstances - merely

Insurance Press Co. v. Montauk Co., 103 App. Div. 472, 475, 93 N. Y. Supp. 134, 136-37 (1905). 6 Stevens v. Episcopal Church History Co., 140 App. Div. 570, 125 N. Y. Supp. 573 (i9io). But see Van Cott v. Van Brunt, 82 N. Y. 535 (i88o), where the work done had to be paid for in stock and such stock was issued in good faith. The issue was upheld even though the labor might not be worth the par value of the stock issued. 7 Coleman v. Booth, 268 Mo. 64, i86 S. W. 102I (I9I6), a case weakened by the fact that the circumstances raised the issue of probable fraud. 8 This would seem to be the rule in New York. The case of Gamble v. Queens County Water Co., 123 N. Y. 9I, 25 N. E. 201 (i8go), raised the problem of validity of issue of stock for water mains and connections in adjacent territory. Concededly, the cost of the property was less than the amount of stock issued. Yet its strategic location might very well give it a value to the issuing corporation in excess of cost. The New York Court of Appeals directed a new trial, instructing that this element be taken into consideration. The prospective earning power of the development - substantially goodwill in the modern understanding of that term - would appear thus to be recognized at least in connection with tangible property. 9 See DODD, STOCK WATERING (1930) 57 et seq., 77. Dr. Dodd comes to the conclusion that there is no sharp distinction between the rules such as is commonly assumed by the bar, the fact being that courts starting from apparently opposite premises reach pretty much similar results.


  - and that unless a situation appeared calling for a remedy and
requiring this particular remedy the right should not necessarily be assumed to exist.25 The only conclusion that can be drawn from the tangled history rather than the expansion of such business beyond the original limits." This is the kind of distinction which satisfies a meticulous jurist and drives a business man to distraction. Must 1, says he, determine at my peril whether or not the money I expect to raise by selling stock is for " the business " of my corporation or " the expansion of such business " ? 22 Borg v. International Silver Co., II F.(2d) I47 (C. C. A. 2d, I925). 23 Meredith v. New Jersey Zinc & Iron Co., 55 N. J. Eq. 21I, 37 Atl. 539 (i897). See the comment in BERLE, CASES AND MATERIALS IN THE LAW OF CORPORATION FINANCE 344. See also Thom v. Baltimore Trust Co., I58 Md. 352, I48 Atl. 234 (1930). 24 General Investment Co. v. Bethlehem Steel Corp., 88 N. J. Eq. 237, I02 Atl. 252 (I9I7). 25 Drinker, Preimptive Right of Shareholders (I930) 43 HARV. L. REV. 586; Dwight, The Right of Stockholders to New Stock (I908) I8 YALE L. J. IoI; Frey, Shareholders' Preimptive Rights (1929) 38 YALE L. J. 563; Morawetz, Prelimptive Rights of Shareholders (I928) 42 HARV. L. REv. i86.


  (i) The rule that dividends must be withheld only for a business
reason: private or personal motives may not be indulged. 30 Bodell v. General Gas & Elec. Corp., supra note 28, at I28-29, I32 Atl. at 446.


This rule, whether worked out in equity or from a " presumed interpretation " of simple contract, is fundamental.37 It requires no discussion here save to point out that it forms one of the standard safeguards in equity against the unreasonable manipulation of dividend policy.

C. The power to acquire stock in other corporations must be so used as to tend to the benefit of the corporation as a whole and may not be used to forward the enterprises of the managers as individuals or to subserve special interests within or without the corporation. The rule above stated is probably honored more in breach than in present practice, but there seems to be no reason to doubt its existence as a matter of law. The rule has a history which may be briefly sketched here. Leaving aside special restrictive statutes of which there are many, and assuming a full kit of statutory and charter powers to purchase stock, courts have, nevertheless, limited the use of this power almost from the beginning of corporate history.38 Thus it has been insisted that where one cor- 37 Cases are collected in (I9I9) I4 C. J. ? 1236. 38 The first line of limitation was that the mere existence of a corporation implied that its powers should be exercised and its capital extended through its own officers and employees and not indirectly through another corporation operated under its control. Anglo-American Land Co. v. Lombard, 132 Fed. 721, 736 (C. C. A. 8th, 1904); see also People v. Chicago Gas Trust Co., I30 Ill. 268, 22 N. E. 798 (I88)); Elkins v. Camden & Atlantic R. R., 36 N. J. Eq. 5 (I882).


D. The reserved power of the corporation to amend its charter must be so exercised that the result will tend to benefit the corporation as a whole, and to distribute equitably the benefit or the sacrifice, as the case may be, between all groups in the corporation as their interests may appear. 43 The question remains open as to whether a corporation may not have as its primary purpose the use of its funds in a fashion analogous to a " blind pool." The older corporation statutes do not readily permit a corporation so to state its objects. The modern corporate form does permit precisely this. It would seem that the avowed object of the corporate management, particularly as announced to the public in the publicity surrounding the issue of its stock, might well indicate the primary purposes " sought for in these cases. In any case, a studied trend toward liberality in permitting purchases of stock in other corporations is noticeable. One reason for this seems to be that no field of business is necessarily disconnected from any other field under the prevailing circumstances; it would be a courageous court which would undertake to tell the directors of an enterprise that another area of business necessarily lay outside the scope of reasonable and profitable connection with their enterprise.


44 See BERLE, STUDIES IN THE LAW OF CORPORATION FINANCE (I928) (" Nonvoting Stock and Bankers' Control "). And the presumption would certainly not exist as regards shares which did not vote. For instance, in the case of a vote of common stockholders reducing capital and thereby reducing the " cushion" or security behind preferred shares, which did not vote on the reduction. 45 The language of the court in Davis v. Louisville Gas & Elec. Co., I42 Atl. 654 (Del. 1928), would seem to indicate this. The court, after remarking that where a large majority of stockholders have voted for the change there is a presumption of good faith, then examined where stock most hurt by the amendment was held, and pointed out that since the management itself stood to be most prejudiced by the change, the presumption of good faith would be difficult to rebut. But the implication is plain that the presumption is rebuttable. One may feel, however, that the court's examination of the facts was hardly complete. A public utility holding company (the majority holder in the Davis case) might well have an interest in sacrificing both its own and the minority interests in one company in order thereby to forward the interests of a quite different company. 46 North-West Trans. Co. v. Beatty, [1887] 12 A. C. (P. C.) 589; Camden & Atlantic R. R. v. Elkins, 37 N. J. Eq. 273 (1883) (but quaere whether this case would be decided in the same mnanner today).


as to " confiscate " the rights of the minority, nor so as to oppress them unreasonably.4" The mere power concentrated in the hands of, say, a parent corporation, or of the management itself, appears to be tested by rules almost exactly like those applicable to boards of directors. Where the majority power is in fact exercised by or through the management or its control, courts take cognizance of that fact.48 To the principle of equitable control of the power to amend the certificate of incorporation, there seems to be not a single exception in any American jurisdiction. The stringency of the control varies. In substantially all states it is held that no amendment of the certificate of incorporation can interfere with certain specific rights. The principal example of this is the right of a holder of accumulative preferred stock to be protected against any amendment which disturbs accrued unpaid cumulative dividends.49 This is familiarly spoken of as a " vested right," though the phrase states a conclusion rather than an argument. As a matter of strict English, the right to have unpaid cumulative dividends charged as a preference against the net assets of the corporation seems not different in kind from the right to receive a preference on liquidation up to a stated amount. As such, the former would seem to be as subject to amendment as the latter under a reserved power to alter "preferences." Nevertheless, practically every case on the subject prohibits an amendment modifying accrued cumulative dividends, substantially on the theory that to do so is an oppression of the preferred shareholder.

47 New Haven & Derby R. R. v. Chapman, 38 Conn. 56 (i870); Perkins v. Coffin, 84 Conn. 275, 79 Atl. I070 (i9ii); Lonsdale Corp. v. International Mercantile Marine Co., ioi N. J. Eq. 554, I39 Atl. 50 (I927); Kent v. Quicksilver Mining Co., 78 N. Y. I59 (I879). 48 Central Trust Co. v. Bridges, 57 Fed. 753 (C. C. A. 6th, I893); Kavanaugh v. Kavanaugh Knitting Co., 226 N. Y. I85, I23 N. E. I48 (IgIg). The same rule in a different form appears in Farmers' Loan & Trust Co. v. New York & Northern Ry., I5o N. Y. 4IO, 44 N. E. I043 (I896). See also Outwater v. Public Serv. Corp. of New Jersey, infra note 56. 49 Yoakum v. Providence Biltmore Hotel Co., 34 F.(2d) 533 (D. R. I. I929); Morris v. American Pub. Util. Co., I4 Del. Ch. 136, I22 Atl. 696 (I923); Lonsdale v. International Mercantile Marine Co., Ioi N. J. Eq. 554, I39 Atl. 50 (I927). But even this right was questioned in Windhurst v. Central Leather Co., ioi N. J. Eq. 543, 138 Atl. 772 (1927), where the corporation was in such bad condition that failure to modify such rights might have been disastrous.


Certain states, notably New Jersey, enlarge this area of " vested rights." 0 A majority of jurisdictiong appear to permit the amendment upon a showing that the business interests of the corporation, including the class of stock whose preferences are affected, require the change. Even Delaware, the loosest of jurisdictions, suggests, obiter, that if a showing can be made that the majority is acting adversely to the minority, primarily to benefit itself as against the minority, without corresponding compensation through business strength or otherwise to all concerned, an injunction will issue.5" This process of advantage to one group at the expense of another is usually described under the loose and somewhat misleading term " fraud "; but the meaning seems plain. The nmajority of amendments, even those cutting down specific contract rights such as the right to a fixed dividend, the right to a fixed preference in assets, and the right to a stated participation, are commonly sustained; but no court seems to have based its decision on the naked power to amend. In every case, the equities have been examined, the business situation considered, and the reasoning upholding the amendment has been grounded on the theory that the amendment was under the peculiar circumstances equitable for all concerned. There may be dispute on the facts; there certainly is ground for believing that few dissenting stockholders are in a position to cope with the management (which commonly represents the majority) in a battle to determine where the business interests of the group as a whole really lie. But it can not be said that the results lend any color to the proposition that an absolute right to amend the charter has ever been recognized despite the plain power granted by statute and carried forward by appropriate provision in the certificate of incorporation. E. The power to transfer the corporate enterprise to another enterprise by merger, exchange of stock, sale of assets or otherwise, may be exercised only in such a manner that the respective interests of the shareholders of all classes are respectively recognized and substantially protected. Substantially all corporate statutes today grant to corporations created under them the power to unite with other enterprises or 50 Lonsdale v. International Mercantile Marine Co., supra note 49. 51 Davis v. Louisville Gas & Elec. Co., 142 Atl. 654 (Del. Ch. 1928).


52 See BALLANTINE, CORPORATIONS (I928) 594-95. 53 International & Great Northern R. R. v. Bremond, 53 Tex. 96 (I88o). 54 Ervin v. Oregon Ry. & Nav. Co., 20 Fed. 577, 580 (C. C. S. D. N. Y. I884), aff'd, 27 Fed. 625 (C. C. S. D. N. Y. I886). The quotation belies the actual decision; the court ultimately held the transaction inequitable, and charged the new corporation's assets with a lien in favor of complainants.


It is singular that no generalization has been attempted covering equitable control over situations where statute and charter have '59 I44 Fed. at 77I. 60 I24 App. Div. 262, io8 N. Y. Supp. 978 (I908). 61 Mayfield v. Alton Ry. Gas & Elec. Co., i98 Ill. 528, 65 N. E. I00 (1902). 62 Laumann v. Lebanon Valley R. R., 30 Pa. St. 42 (1858); Petry v. Harwood Elec. Co., 280 Pa. I42, I24 Atl. 302 (I924).
