FOR WHOM CORPORATE MANAGERS ARE TRUSTEES: A NOTE

T HE administration of corporations -peculiarly, a few hundred large corporations -is now the crux of American industrial life. Upon the securities of these corporations has been erected the dominant part of the property system of the industrial east. A major function of these securities is to provide safety, security, or means of support for that part of the community which is unable to earn its living in the normal channels of work or trade. Under cover of that system, certain individuals may perhaps acquire a disproportionate share of wealth. But this is an incident to the system and not its major premise; statistically, it plays a relatively minor part. Historically, and as a matter of law, corporate managements have been required to run their affairs in the interests of their security holders. From time to time other groups, notably labor, have asserted their claims; and these claims are receiving steadily greater recognition as a cost of industry. If these costs are not met, security holders receive an illusory additional profit. But the security holder's claim was the supposed main objective. Professor Dodd has challenged the theory.' He has stated his own thesis: "The present writer is thoroughly in sympathy with Mr. Berle's efforts to establish a legal control which will more effectually prevent corporate managers from diverting profit into their own pockets from those of stockholders, and agrees with many of the specific rules which the latter deduces from his trusteeship principle. He nevertheless believes that it is undesirable, even with the laudable purpose of giving stockholders much-needed protection against self-seeking managers, to give increased emphasis at the present time to the view that business corporations exist for the sole purpose of making profits for their stockholders. He believes that public opinion, which ultimately makes law, has made and is today making substantial strides in the direction of a view of the business corporation as an economic institution which 1 For Whom are Corporate Managers Trustees? (I932) 45 HARV. L. REV. II45.


This is a point of view which can not be ignored.

I As a matter of economics and social theory, Professor Dodd's argument is not only sound but familiar. Indeed, the present writer made that argument before the Bureau of Personnel Administration in I93o,3 and collaborated in working out the statistical basis for it.4 No one familiar with European or advanced American thought seriously disputes the propositions: first, that the present mode of life entails a high degree of large-scale production; second, that this necessitates an unprecedented degree of financial concentration which has clothed itself in the corporate form; and, third, that the result of such concentration has been, and must be, to pose a few large organisms, the task of whose administrators is, fundamentally, that of industrial government. In other words, the great industrial managers, their bankers and still more the men composing their silent " control," 5 function today more as princes and ministers than as promoters or 2 Id. at II47-48. 3 Berle, The Equitable Distribution of Ownership, in A SYMPOSIUM ON BusiNESS MANAGEMENT AS A HUMAN ENTERPRISE. The mimeographed symposium is available at the Bureau of Personnel Administration, 420 Lexington Avenue, Room 745, New York City. The paper referred to was dated December II, I930. The writer even attempted a tentative classification of the various claims on the corporate wealth and income stream, namely: (i) The security owners. (2) The management. (3) The customer or patron. (4) The workers, including the entire list of salaried or wage earners. (5) Certain general community claims which, however, might best be worked out through taxation. Under this last head would come matters of public welfare like charity and benevolence referred to by Professor Dodd in the article cited. 4 " The Modern Corporation and Private Property " by the writer and Gardiner C. Means, in the course of publication by the Commerce Clearing House Chicago, Illinois. 5 " Control " is here used to mean that individual or small group of individuals who are able to mobilize or cast sufficient votes to elect the corporate management. This is the sense in which the word is used in the financial communities; and the institution has apparently already acquired a legal status.


the security holder is invited either to jettison his corporate securities and demand relief from the state, or to decline to save money at all under a system which grants to someone else power to take his savings at will. The consumer or patron is left nowhere, unless he learns the dubious art of boycott. This is an invitation not to law or orderly government, but to a process of economic civil war.

It is a great misfortune that so little of American enlightened juristic thought has dealt with the subject of private property. The great liberals, notably Mr. Justice Holmes, were rooted in the doctrine that the individual could look out for himself in the economic field, provided he had a full kit of civil rights and political privileges. Some portion of the thinking entered the field of labor rights. No one succeeded in becoming effectively interested in what happened to the fruits of labor; there is, even now, entire absence of realization that the corporate system is steadily conscripting and absorbing the bulk of those fruits to the extent that they are not presently consumed.9 Yet a society based on the individual, whose support and maintenance the state does not assume, can only be carried on by vigorous protection of the property that he has. It is a matter of experience that during two periods of man's life, childhood and old age, he can not support himself; and that sickness, child-bearing, and incidental economic readjustments will make even further lacunae. The only bridge, in our system, to cover these gaps is private property. The common law has based its whole fabric on this premise. Under this system, property has now split into two distinct categories. One class may be called active -the farm, the little business, the collection of tangible property which the owner can himself possess, manage, and deal with. The other may be 9 Again reference must be made to "The Modern Corporation and Private Property " now in process of publication. Cf. note 4, supra. Figures show that during the past few years (I932 is an obvious exception) fifty-five per cent of savings were absorbed into the corporate system, the balance being divided between government securities and real estate in one form or another. Further, this process is not optional. If all investors elected to endeavor to invest their savings outside the corporate system, there would simply not be enough investments to go round.


claims by labor, by customers and patrons, by the community and the like, which cut down that residue. It would, as Professor Dodd points out, be unfortunate to leave the law in such shape that these developments could not be recognized as a matter of constitutional or corporation law. But it is one thing to say that the law must allow for such developments. It is quite another to grant uncontrolled power to corporate managers in the hope that they will produce that development. Most students of corporation finance dream of a time when corporate administration will be held to a high degree of required responsibility -a responsibility conceived not merely in terms of stockholders' rights, but in terms of economic government satisfying the respective needs of investors, workers, customers, and the aggregated community. Indications, indeed, are not wanting that without such readjustment the corporate system will involve itself in successive cataclysms perhaps leading to its ultimate downfall. But apart from occasional and brilliant experiments of men like Mr. Swope and Mr. Young (who after all are the exceptions rather than the rule), we must expect our evolutionary process to be stimulated from quite different quarters. Unchecked by present legal balances, a social-economic absolutism of corporate administrators, even if benevolent, might be unsafe; and in any case it hardly affords the soundest base on which to construct the economic commonwealth which industrialism seems to require. Meanwhile, as lawyers, we had best be protecting the interests we know, being no less swift to provide for the new interests as they successively appear. A. A. Berle, Jr. NEW YORK CITY.
