Reviews ECONOMICS-LAW AND PLANNED BUSINESS The Modern Corporation and Private Property By ADOLF A. BERLE,Jr. (Faculty of Law, Columbia University), and GARDNERC. MEANS (Columbia University). xiii arid 394 pp. (New York : Macmillan Company.) 1933. 20s. net. AS a result of the growth of large corporations in the United States, 2,000 persons out of a total population of 125,000,000 are in a position to control and direct half the industry of the United States. This is due to the fact that while corporations have been growing rapidly, the actual ownership of the stock has been spreading further and further. By means of various devices, sanctioned by the law, control has become vested in a very small proportion of these stockholders. And while the ownership of the corporation property is still presumed to rest fundamentally on the stockholders, the actual fact is that the power resulting from ownership is exercised by a comparatively few persons only. This divorce between ownership and control is the theme of this book. An economist proves the facts by a wealth of statistics, and a lawyer proves the inadequacy of the rules of law which have been evolved. The property lawyer will be interested in the demonstration. A pubIic lawyer like myself is interested primarily in the consequences. These the authors naturally leave for others to indicate. They say only that: " The control groups have cleared the way for the claims of a group far wider than either the owners or the control. They have placed the community in a position to demand that the modern corporation serve not alone the owners or the control but all society." Quite : but how ? By socialism or by the corporate state ? This problem has not been really faced anywhere, so far as I know. It is not merely a question of the theory of the State-anyone at all familiar with continental theories of law will know that this problem is being discussed-it is primarily a problem of governmental technique. By what means are corporations to be controlled? In any case, we must be thankful to the authors of this book for demonstrating the importance of the problem. W.I. J.

The Limited Liability Financial Democracy. By MARGARET MLLLER, Ph.D., and CAMPBLLL, Ph.D. 132 pp. (Hogarth Press.) 4. 6d.

### DOUGLAS

RECENTeconomic thought has marked down the investment of the national savings as a phase of economic activity with which some major current problems are associated. The subject has several aspects : the authors of this little study are concerned only with onethe working of the limited liability company under British law and British practice. The title is not happy. Democracy-whatever that may meanhas very little to do with the real issues, and to import the termino-logy of political science into the treatment of a problem of economic or industrial organisation is misleading rather than illuminating. How misleading appears on the very -first page, when our authors speak of the growing democratisation of wealth in the community,” while a few pages later it is implied that the joint stock system, which in its inception was essentially democratic ” has ceased to possess that engaging if nebulous charactistic. If words were invented to conceal thought, democracy ’” must be the subject of one of the master patents. But we must be fair to our authors. The central idea which has engaged their attention is that of the fitness or otherwise of the joint stock company to serve as the principal vehicle for the utilisation of the growing savings of the community in productive enterprise. If the increasing savings of an increasing number of small investors are to be applied in this direction, is the joint stock company, as at present constituted and conducted, a suitable and satisfactory instrument for the purpose? Now this is a real and important issue, and if our authors had allowed themselves to take a wider and, may we add, a better informed outlook, something of material value might have resulted. But they ignore too many of the essential components of the existing system-the company promoter, the Stock Exchange, and, to come even closer to fundamentals, the distinction between those stockholders whose status is that of creditors of the company and those who own or have rights in the equity and are therefore proprietors. The fact is that the limited liability company is a single structural form which has nowadays to serve a number of very different purposes, and it is futile to examine and seek to improve the form without a preliminary study and classification of those purposes. It cannot be assumed that the functions of the Boards of, say, the Bank of England, London Passenger Transport, Imperial Chemical Industries, Provincial Cinematograph Theatres, Malacca Rubber Plantations, and the Army and Navy Stores, are in each and every ‘ I

### I‘

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public A dminisfrafion

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License particular the same whatever the law may say. That is why, as our authors are at pains to point out, legal theory is so far removed from actual current practice. The subject is admirably opened up in Book 2 of “ Brikin’s Industrial Future,” and if those suggestive chapters had been taken as the starting point of further research, the present study could scarcely have failed to acquire a cogency and effectiveness which, as it is, it lacks. It contains some interesting statistical material on the subject of the qualifications (in the general sense), age, and pluralism of British Boards of Directors at the present time; but even here the material is of little value until we have asked and answered the questions:-What are directors swpposed to do; what do they do ; what ozcght they to be required to do ? Right at the root of the whole matter lies this question of equities, with which is inevitably associated stock market valuation of future prospects, and, with it, speculation. There is much to be said for the view that in a really civilised country the only form of popular speculation that would be allowed would be betting on horse-races, for here at any rate it is difficult for the price to be widely out of reIation to the animals’ chances of success, and the agony is not long drawn out. But if speculation in equities-for that is what speculative, and some speculation is the price of progress. The question is that can be done to protect the investor from his impulses. Certainly the only effect of “ financial democracy,” as our authors would call it, would be to destroy the speculation altogether. No amount of tinkering about with the powers, duties, and qualifications of directors, the functions of auditofi, or even with the licence allowed to company promoters, will alter the fact that a speculative investment is speculative, and soon speculation is the price of progress. The question is rather, by whom and in what form should the risks be borne. The really important problem is whether the machinery for directing the savings of the people-the “ new money ”-into the most fruitful uses is as good as it might be; and this leads us into a region in which the relations between directors and shareholders have little part, and which this book scarcely touches. There is another aspect of the subject to which some attention is given. If company directors are no longer (if they ever were) under the effective control of their stockholders : if “ the ideal of democracy, upon which the joint stock system is founded, is more honoured in the breach than in the observance,” how is this divorce between ownership and control to be cured, if cure it needs ? Here, however, the issue is that of protecting the interests of the community as a whole rather than that of proecting the stockholder; and the consequence of confininE attention to the latter issue, as this book does, is that the ultimate-problem is extruded from its proper place. H.N. B.

An Economist at Bay Gold, Unmplopent and Capitalism. By T. E. GREGORY, Professor of Economics in the University of London. (P. S. King & Son.) 12s. IT is singularly difficult to review adequately those volumes in which economists gather together the more important of their occasional Writings ; and it is hardest of all just now , with situations changing so fast that papers written only a few years ago seem like revenants from another world. But there is compensation: for if the situations change with bewildering rapidity, it becomes all the more interesting to see whether the economist changes too. Professor Gregory, I think,has changed, even within the time covered by the writing of these reprinted papers. In the earlier of them he appears, in relation to the less orthodox of his professional colleagues, as an interested doubter, open to conviction but inclined to move cautiously in the application of new methods. But by the end he doubts no longer: he has become, not a sceptic, but a whole-hearted unbeliever, decisively hostile to every new experiment in economic control, and craving only for a return to a Capitdlism based on the utmost reliance on letting things alone. This extreme preference for Eaissez-faire is, to be sure, f a r less marked in his monetary writings, which fall within his own special field, than in his excursions into other branches of economics. But even in relation to money there is a sharp contrast between the tone of his earlier papers and that of his Observations on the Central Bank BiZl, dealing with the proposal of the Commonwealth of Australia to establish a Central Bank. In this paper the entire emphasis is laid on the necessity for keeping the Central Bank away from political interference, limiting the freedom of the Government to borrow from it, trusting in its independence in managing the credit situation, as far as it is to be managed at all, in accordance with gold standard requirements. The case for a State-controlled Central Bank is not discussed: it is simply dismissed, as of course it is bound to be by anyone who takes Professor Gregory’s attitude on the general question of economic policy. This general attitude emerges more clearly in the two final papers, in which Professor Gregory discusses proposals for Economic Planning and reflects upon the future of Capitalism as a system. In these papers , every sort of planned economy is excommunicated with bell, book and candle. We are told that planning is bound to be wrong unless it allows for change, but that if it allows for change it confesses itself to be wrong-a line of argument hardly worthy of the author’s reputation for close logical reasoning. Against the idea of

### I94

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public A dministration

planning, in all its forms, is set the familiar ideal of the “free economy ” based on consumers’ preferences, with the waste due to the wrong anticipation of those preferences as one of its unavoidable incidents, but with an entire absence of any authority able to force the consumer to consume what he does not want. fn Professor Gregory’s view, all planning involves forcing things upon consumers, instead of leaving them free to choose. It is of course perfectly true that planning does involve to some extent substituting collective for individual decisions about what is to be made and consumed. But can collective decision be fairly identified with force as against individual decision, which means freedom? If so, has not the entire growth of democracy been based on a misapprehension, and been in effect a mistake? Moreover, can the system of free individual choice be identified with Capitalism as we know it, or in any form in which we are likely to know it ? Is not this freedom rather a creature of the theoretical imagination of the Austrian Economists? Again, Professor Gregory admits the wastes involved in capitalist production, as far as they can arise from capitalist misanticipation of the actual course of demand. But he says nothing of the much greater wastes, from the standpoint of achieving maximum satisfaction of wants, that are involved in the capitalist maldistriiution of income. These, however, are Professor Gregory’s excursions into a field that is not peculiarly his own. His book must be judged rather by the papers which do deal with his special field of banking policy. Among these he reprints his well-known and interesting sceptic’s addendum to the Report of the Macmillan Committee, and his important League of Nations Memorandum on Gold Movements, together with a number of slighter papers contributed to various economic journals, and one or two addresses. There are two acute papers on banking in the United States-one, of special interest, written in 1925, and very pertinent to-day, when the question of branch banking is again under active consideration. There is a study on The Future of International Trade, containing a sound analysis of the factors which are tending to lessen the relative volume of international exchange in the modem world, a rather supeficial paper called Commonsense and the Balance of Trade, and a slight but interesting study on Self-sufficiency as an Economic Ideal. Enough has been said to show that Professor Gregory supplies his readers with varied fare. Some of the papers are perhaps too slight and occasional to have been worth reprinting, and the final section is altogether inferior in quality to the rest of the book. But the banking papers, whether one agrees with them or not, are the work of a most acute and learned observer whose opinion always repays, and needs, careful study. G. D. H. COLE. I95 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Re vieu>s

### Old and Scarce Tracts on Money

### 2.

With a Preface by R. MCCVUOCH.Photographed from the original volume printed or the Political Economy Club, 1856. ~ v o . ,pp. xviii +637. (London: P. S. King & Son,) 15s. WHETHER or not the strong interest displayed in the history of economic doctrines is a very satisfactory sign of the vitality of economic science to-day, there is little doubt that the present reprint will be warmly welcomed by many students who are curious of the state of opinion on monetary policy in the seventeenth and eighteenth Centuries. The pamphlets reprinted by McCulloch for the Political Economy Club are valuable not only for students of currency history, but also from the wider standpoint of the development of economic thought. The earliest paper is a speech of 1626 attributed to Sir Robert Cotton. There is also an able State Paper of 1660,tracts by Vaughan, Petty, Lowdnes, and three short, but weighty, “ Representations ” by Sir Isaac Newton written during his Mastership of the Mint. The ‘‘ Essay upon Money and Coins ” of Joseph Harris, published in 1757 and 1758,is especially remarkable for its anticipation of many of the doctrines which were later elaborated by Adam Smith and subsequent authors, including as it does an outline of the celebrated theory of the division of labour and an anticipation of the quantity theory of money. Although as a source book for the history of monetary theory McCulloch’s selection is too limited and too &se, it contains material of great value which it is next to impossible to find outside one or two large libraries. F. R. C. Management of To-morrow By L. URWICK, Director of the International Management Institute. (Nisbet.) 8s. 6d. INhis preface Mr. Urwick admits that his book is partly based on an address to this Institute: and indeed, readers of this Journal will discover in the book many pleasant traces of his stimulating paper Gn ‘* Promotion in Industry ” (PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, V, 184). The statement made confidently in the paper, that the faults of bureaucracy and “ red tape ” have nothing to do with the form of ownership but are merely a function of size, is expressed more tentatively in the book; in this and in other ways Mr. Urwick’s paper gave the civil servant possibly too much cause for Batisfaction. The book leaves him in a much humbler frame of mind, by showing how

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public Admin istrafion

much still remains to be done by large-scale organisations, whether private or public, in scientifically handling the problems that confront him. Mr. Urwick is not alone in suggesting that the whole machinery of production needs to be reorganised from the point of view of distribution. ‘‘ The main job of distribution is not to get rid of what production makes, it is to tell production what it ought to make.” “ Business pays lipservice to the importance of the consumer. But usually it only knows who its customers have been and what they have done. It has no notion who its potential consumers are and what they will do.” Thus he points the way to market-research-a need that is just as urgent in publicly-owned utilities as in private organisations. He admits generously the usefulness for market-research of the annual reports of the Department of Overseas Trade, and he blames the manufacturer for not insisting on more information of the same sort, prepared by official and private agencies in collaboration. On the subject of the promotion of staff, Mr. UNvick emphasises “ the need for a complete analysis of the duties and responsibilities of every job in the organisation.” Our annual reports on staff in the Civil Service have at any rate the advantage of forcing us to think dispassionately about a man’s qualifications: but they assume far too readily that the qualifications required for all work in the service are approximately the same. Mr. Urwick vigorously assails the practiceas common in industry as in the Civil Service-of selecting foremen and supervisors in virtue of their skill in the particular task which is to be supervised; he prefers the Army system in which ‘‘ a platoon officer is not usually drawn directly from the ranks, and never, except in emergency, from the rams of the same regiment in which he serves as an officer.” To your reviewer the most important part of the book is a short chapter (fourteen pages of large print) on the theory of organisation. The argument is so condensed that it is difficult to condense it still further, and difficult to be sure of interpreting the author’s conclusion rightly. He takes as his fundamental assumption Sir Ian Hamilton’s dictum that “ t h e human brain cannot directly control more than five or six other brains.” (This assumption is perhaps too readily accepted nowadays: the sceptic might suggest that it all depends on the nature of the work and the dispositions of the controller and the controlled.) He then outlines the main types of organisation:(a) the “ serial ” type, in which, in a motor factory, for instance, one man controls the foundry, another the machine shop, and so on-a type of organisation rare in the Civil Service; I97 F 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Reoieus

( b ) two “ unitary ” types:(i) division into geographical areas; (ii) division according to objects-for example, the Mails Branch and the Telephone Branch in the Post Office; and
(c) “ functional ” organisation-branches dealing with questions
of personnel, publicity, accountancy, &c. The problems of co-ordination caused by the co-existence of more than one of these types are all too briefly described; and through it all the author insists that there must be a supreme co-ordinating authority and a formal “ scalar ” process by which the authority operates throughout the entire structure. Finally he reaches the conclusion that the right form of organisation is one in which the ‘‘ chief ’’ ‘ has only four or five people reporting to him,his principal ‘ line ’ subordinates and his chief-of-staff.” The functional specialists would all work up to the chief-of-staff, whose task would obviously be far from easy. This chapter deserves to be expanded into a book in itself. Mr. Urwick deplores the lack of scientific data: such data as might be available are often concealed from fear of giving away information to a competitor. The main theme of the book is that the administrative man ” of the twentieth century is taking the place of the “ economic man ” of the nineteenth. As Mr. Urwick would probably admit, the statement is valid to a far less extent within the sphere of distribution than Within the sphere of production; but in so far as it is valid, it encourages us to believe that the problems of industry and of the public services are essentially the same, and that if we both had the capacity to think about them, the courage to grapple with them, and the opportunities to discuss them, we could help one another to their solution. All those who want to improve the public services, and all those who want them to play an adequate part in the work of industrial reconstruction, should read this excellent book. W.D. S.

### The Triumph of Mediocrity in Business

By HORACE SECRIST,Ph.D. Pp. xxix + 468. Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A., 1933.)

### (Northwestern University,

THATmediocrity tends to prevail in the conduct of competitive business, using the word mediocrity in the sense of average conditions is the conclusion of this careful and laborious statistical study. This is a result, the author observes, which is very important for current discussions of planned and regulated economic life, although he is less concerned with these wider considerations than to set out the

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public Administration

F 2 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License results of his investigations into the trading history of department stores, retail clothing, retail hardware and wholesale grocery stores, banks, railways, and corn wheat and oat production. The relative freedom with which firms make available the facts relating to their business is characteristic of the U.S.A. and a study such as this would probably be impossible elsewhere, merely because the data on which it is based are not to be had. Thus Professor Secrist analyses for upwards of forty-nine department stores ratios of gross margin to net sales, total expense to net sales, wages and salaries to net sales, advertising to net sales and net profit or loss to net sales, most of the figures relating to the period I ~ Z O - I ~ ~ O . In all of them Professor Secrist finds ample evidence of regression to type, “ competitive and market forces tend to smooth out abnormalities and to neutralise both advantages and disadvantages, tendencies towards mediocrity becoming the rule.” This is a result, the author observes, which is in accordance with general economic teaching. It is indeed no very new discovery in human affairs‘‘ sic omnia fatis in peius ruere ac retro sublapsa referri.” However, Professor Secrist has exhausted the resources of statistical methodology to prove it. Although he does not put forward his results as more than an expression of observed statistical uniformity and although he admits that he would have liked considerably more data than he succeeded in obtaining, few of his readers will be disposed to challenge the cumulated results presented in page after page of statistical tables, diagrams and charts. It remains to ask whether the results actually prove the thesis he propounds and to inquire whether they may not be a function of the statistical methods employed. Has the author, for instance, merely laboured to show that an average is an average? From such a charge he may be readily absolved. To the final question, in what way the results may find practical application, the author suggests that the time has come when it should be possible to set about the construction of tables of trade mortality in which rates of regression might show the chances of survival and the likelihood of bankruptcy just as mortality and other actuarial statistics show the likelihood of death, fire, theft, &c. The book is an interesting example of the type of results which are becoming possible in the U.S.A. through intensive studies of business phenomena. It is not many years ago since such studies excited considerable derision in academic circles elsewhere, and any who still affect to maintain this attitude would derive considerable benefit from a careful attention to the researches of workers such as Professor Secrist.

The production of the book, a volume of nearly 500 pages, by photolithography direct from the typescript without typesetting deserves mention.

### F. R. C.

Displacement of Men by Machines Effects of Technological Change in Commercial Printing. By ELIZABETH FAULKNER BAKER,Assistant Professor of Economics, Barnard College Columbia University. Pp. xxii + 284. (New York : Columbia University Press, 1933; London: Humphrey Milford.) 19s. net. I ALTHOUGH technology has now ceased to be a popular topic in the sensational Press, it is not likely to be neglected in current economics. From New York, where technology was invented as a term covering the study of the effect of new machinery on human employment, there now comes what it is to be hoped may be the first of a series of works based on a detailed study of the results of introducing new machinery in one process of a single industry. Professor Baker's study is confined to the printing industry and to the effects within that industry of the introduction of mechanical methods of feeding sheets of paper into the power press, a process formerly done by semi-skilled manual labour. Despite the invention of automatic feeding devices at the beginning of the twentieth century, it was not until after the war that they were used on a large scale in the United States. About g6 per cent. of the. presses of that country were still being hand fed in 1913, but by 1929 two-thirds were machine fed. This is a sufficiently striking revolution in an important part of the printing industry to lead to the expectation that unemployment would result. But despite her undoubtedly industrious research, Professor Baker has not been able to find trustworthy evidence of it. Several reasons may be advanced in explanation of her difficulties. Apart from the lack of adequate records in printing plants there is the overriding consideration that the period studied (1913-1929) saw a very considerable industrial expansion. A further limitation arises from the fact that for practical reasons the study was conhed to some fifty odd plants in New York. In New York the search for victims of technological unernployment proved singularly inconclusive despite every assistance given by the printing trade-unions and the master printers. A questionnaire sent by the president of the press assistants' union to his 2,400 members yielded only 120 replies, of whom only twenty-four claimed that their unemployment was the result of improved machinery. Other methods to obtain evidence were also tried but out of 1 0 0 I'

### "

### I'

### "

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public Administration

pressmen and press assistants eventually interviewed, only twentyseven were found to have been displaced by technical changes and of these only twelve were then actually unemployed. When it is remembered that the existence of a small labour reserve is no uncommon thing in this industry, which is subject to considerable fluctuations of demand, this is a singularly inconclusive result. The author realises that on such data it is impossible to base any generalisations. The printing industry is one over which technologists would do well to ponder. A hundred years before Professor Baker began her study the steam press was making its revolutionary contribution to rapid and cheaper printing and before the close of the nineteenth century machinery had penetrated into the composing room also. Besides these two major inventions that of mechanical feeding sinks into insignificance. They had the effect of cheapening printed matter to an amazing extent and thereby contributing enormously to the general expansion of industry, an expansion in which printing shared. Professor Baker recognises that the same forces are at work to-day and in the light of such knowledge she pleads that the industry should work out its own salvation, that employers should not be blind to all considerations save that of price and that workers should not be blind to everyttung save the maintenance of jobs. With this view it is possible to have every sympathy although the methods by which so desirable a change in outlook may be brought about are nowhere clearly indicated. The negative conclusions to the question she set out to answer do nothing to impair the value of Profesosr Baker’s work as an essay in.descriptive economics. She has amassed a wealth of data relating to the printing industry which it would be difficult to parallel in this country and her account of trade-union negotiations over the new machines will also be read with interest by all students of current labour problems. F. R. C. World Prosperity as Sought Through the Economic Work of the League of Nations By WALLACE MCCLURE.tho., pp. xxxix + 613. (New York: Macmillan Company.) 20s. OF the two main parts into which this work is divided, the first gives the historical background and outlines the administrative organisation of the League as a whole but not exclusively from the economic standpoint. The second part gives a summary account of the achieve201 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Reoiews

ments of the League in the sphere of economics classified under the main headings of “ Production and Distribution of Wealth,” “ International Trade,” “ Finance ” and ‘‘ The Economics of War and Peace.” The main strength of the book lies in its descriptive review of what has been done in the past rather than in its guidance for the future, although it is plain that Mr. McClure regards a strengthening of allegiance to the principles of the League as the only sure way of improving international economic conditions. At the same time he does not suffer from esprit de Gentve, so difficult to avoid after a prolonged stay there, which is apt to view the achievements and influence of the League on a scale of magnitude very different to that on which they are regarded by the world at large. Mr. McClure has lavished an untiring industry upon the vast wealth of printed material created by the League during its relatively short career. Although the main achievements he records are already common knowledge, a huge amount of work has been accomplished which will be unknown to more than a very few individuals in the service of the League or of the various Governments represented in it. The extent of the field covered and the detail in which widely varying topics are discussed are indeed such that the book will be more valuable for reference than for cursory perusal. It is a work which will be of the greatest value to students of the administrative problems to which the new attempts at international co-ordination give rise in the economic sphere and Mr. McClure deserves their gratitude for completing so lengthy and laborious a task. F. R. C. EDUCATION The Year Book of Education, 1934 Edited by LORDEUSTACE PERCY.Pp, 960. (Evans Brothers.) IT is no easy task to give within prescribed limits a comprehensive review of a year book containing more than nine hundred closely printed pages. In this case, however, the reviewer’s task is made easier by the knowledge that The Year Book of Education, 1934 is compiled under the editorship of Lord Eustace Percy, whose record as President of the Board of Education and continued interest in all phases of educational activity mark him down as a loyal yet critical friend of education. There is little that is traditional in the form of this year book. It contains, it is true, the kind of information which one naturally 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public A dminisfration

expects to find in such a publication-the hard facts and cold figures relating to the conduct of a great national social service; and for this reason alone it should find a place on the library shelves of an education office. But it makes a much wider appeal than this: as in t k two previous issues educational effort is discussed from the angles ot the specialists in education. In the present book, for example, the scope and function of secondary education is covered by a series of articles (each written by an authority on the subject) dealing with the classics, modem languages, natural science, mathematics, history and social studies, geography, music, practical subjects, domestic studies in girls’ schools and physical education; and these articles repay careful study, for not only do they give the administrator a clear idea of what the schools are attempting to do but they also explode the popular fallacy that the schools are out of touch with conditions in a rapidly changing world. No less instructive is the shorter section dealing with “ Creative Education ”: it strikes a tuneful note of hope in the future of that type of education which is carried on out of school hours ”: and concludes with a valuable suggestion, made by Lord Eustace Percy himself, that our great empire needs a centre specially equipped for the study of educational problems. Moreover, certain omissions in the two previously issued year books are made good in the present volume. The survey of the university system in the British Empire, to be found in the Year Book of 1933, made no reference to the universities of South Africa and India : the first omission is now supplied. A chapter on religious education in Scotland completes the account of religious education in the United Kingdom; and new chapters deal with educational systems of certain British colonial possessions and foreign lands, not hitherto discussed. W.J. BEES. Harvard Studies in Education Vol. 22. The School and the Community. A Study of Local Control in the Public Schools of Massachusetts. By L. LELANDUDLEY.(Cambridge: Harvard University Press;London : Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press.) 10s. 6d. As stated in the Preface, “ This book attempts to apply the principles of administration in the light of the historical background, the traditions, the social temper, and the attitude towards governmental institutions characteristic of Massachusetts.” So impartial is the treatment, so sympathetic the understanding of local conditions and so lucid the argument that the book is likely to 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Revieus

carry weight with all desirous of improving the public education in Massachusetts. And it is just the human touch running through the discussions on the functions of committees, financial questions, and modem tendencies that will sustain the interest of many readers living f a r beyond the borders of the State of Massachusetts. The effect, for good and ill, of that intense local patriotism and dislike of encroachment by the State, so characteristic of New England, is made abundantly clear. The state contents itself with laying down broad general laws and securing a minimum standard of education: but the responsibility for providing educational facilities lies, very largely, with the school districts. Since the days of Horace Mann the Superintendents of the State Department of Education have done much to stimulate education in the cities and towns by wise and tactful advice; and the individual areas owe much to the local Superintendents of schools. The first point to strike our attention, contrasting the population of Massachusetts with that of England, is the large number of separate administrative units. The Ordinance of 1647 established the town as the unit of educational control, and, to-day the boundaries for local government control are the same as for educational control. Each of the 316 towns and 39 cities has an elected school conimittee, with from 3 to g members in the towns, and from 5 to 16 members in the cities. These committees have power to administer both elementary and secondary education, but no power to raise funds except in the case of Boston, Cambridge and Lynn. In the towns the school budget must be approved by a Town Meeting and in the cities it is presented to the Council by the mayor who may, or may not be, an ex-oficio member of the school committee. A chapter is devoted to a critical examination of those problems which are bound to arise where administrative control is divorced from financial responsibility. The units vary in area from 103 sq. miles to less than z sq. miles, and in population from 750,000 to 49; almost half have a population of less than 2,500. While Mr. Dudley considers that the units are suitable, speaking generally, for the administration of elementary education, he finds that the system has led to the establishment of many uneconomical and ineffective secondary schools. Consequently he suggests that there is need for state-wide planning of secondary education in the smaller towns. ” He also finds that the procedure with regard to plans for new schools is not satisfactory. Even many schools erected in the new satellite towns fail to reach the standards of modem requirements. ‘ I

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public A dminisfration

He suggests that the State Department of Education should be in the position to give expert advice upon plans for new schools. Mr. Duldey considers that the function of a school committee is to initiate and direct policy and not to interfere with the educational work of the schools; the responsibility for this side of the work should lie with the superintendents and teachers. This conclusion leads him to express a view with regard to the position of women on school committees which will startle many readers in this country. He realises that many hold the belief that women have something to contribute to education which men lack; possibly “ a sympathetic understanding of teachers’ and children’s problems.” He finds, however, that an analysis of the actual work of committees shows that there are few problems on which women can make a unique contribution. Further, “ inasmuch as the occupation of 148 out of 210 women members was represented in a questionnaire as ‘ at home,’ there is substantial ground for believing that in many cases these women have not had the opportunity to develop the attitude of mind and quality of rigorous detached thinking needed in dealing with the more important questions faced by school committees.” Mr. Dudley also deprecates the election of teachers, as such, to school committees; partly because a teacher may be tempted to interfere with the educational working of the schools: but chiefly because a specialist would replace a layman, and “ at no other point in our administrative set-up has the layman an opportunity to influence public education.” Accustomed as we are in England to working by means of subcommittees it is interesting to note that Mr. Dudley dislikes this method RS he t h i n k s that it may lead to the whole committee not taking sufficient interest in general policy. It must be remembered that many of these committees only contain three members and the largest only sixteen members. Details are given of the Superintendency Unions, specially characteristic of Massachusetts, in which two or more small towns combine to elect a Superintendent of schools; and there is a chapter devoted to the whole question of Superintendents. The last chapter, on Basis of Public Support,” is full of interest, including such topics as, the effect of changes in size of families, growth of citizens’ associations formed for the purpose of criticising public expenditure, creation of parent-teacher associations, and the likelihood of greater centralisation and further control by the State. Attention is also directed to the increase in the number of pupils attending private schools. To-day, there are 23 pupils in these private schools for every IOO in the public schools where free education is provided for all for at least eight years and for a further four years 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Reviews

for those capable of profiting by it. Nine-tenths of these pupils are to be found in the parochial elementary and secondary schools, “ sponsored chiefly by the Catholic Church.” The remainder attend schools for the children of the well-to-do. Mr. Dudley states, sympathetically, the reasons which lead well-to-do parents to send their children to such schools; but he fears lest this tendency may result, eventually, in the lowering of the standards in the public schools. The main difference between the system of local administration of education in Massachusetts and in this country lies in the large number of ad hoc bodies controlling both elementary and secondary education but with no power, save in three cases, to raise funds. Mr. Dudley makes out a good case for state-wide planning of secondary education in the smaller towns and for the need of expert advice from the State Department of Education on plans for all new schools. This Study has been most carefully planned; as each problem arises the various factors to be taken into consideration are clearly explained; and thus it is easy to follow the stages by which Mr. Dudley reaches his conclusions. Despite the intricacies of the subject the prose is so direct that the reader has no difficulty in forming a clear picture of the administrative system at work in Massachusetts. Thanks are due to printer and publisher for the lay-out of the book, the clarity of the type, and the quality of the paper.

### H. E. BOOTHROYD.

Delinquent and Neglected Children The Law of Child Protection. By E. E. BOWERMAN, M.A. With a Foreword by the Rt. Hon. Lord Eustace Percy, P.C.,M.P. 124 pp. (pitman.) 5s.. net. THEChildren Act, 1908, was a most beneficent piece of legislation, but during recent years social reformers, and particularly those interested in young people, have been urging an extension of its provisions. The problem (for it is a problem how far the State should interfere with parental rights and duties) was thoroughly examined by the Departmental Committee on the Treatment of Young Offenders in 1927; and some of that Committee’s recommendations were embodied in the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933, a quarter of a century after the principal Act was passed. There is dhppohtment in some quarters where it is felt that the new Act d m not go far enough; but in the main it represents a substantial advance, p d c d a r l y as young people in the age group 16-17 have been brought within the purview of the Juvenile Courts and the 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public Admin isfration

compass of the measures of reclamation and reformation at their disposal. Miss Bowerman’s book will be of interest to the general reader and to students of social science. I t is not sufficiently exact in details to be of considerable service to administrators whose duties lead them to take action under the Act with regard to particular children. TOWN AND REGIONAL PLANNING Town and Regional Development By H.CHAPMAN.~ v o . ,pp. 245. (J. M. Dent & Sons.) Price 10s. 6d. net. THE author starts with a brief introduction advocating national planning on an extended scale, but his main object is to produce a guide to the Town and Country Planning Act, 1932. With this in view he brings together under headings such as “Town Planning Authorities,” “ Procedure in preparing a Scheme,” “ Contents of a Scheme,” ‘‘ Compensation,” &c., the various provisions of each subject which are scattered through the Act, the Town and Country Planning Regulations, the Town and Country Planning (General Interim Development) Order and the Town and Country Planning (General Transitional) Order. This arrangement is valuable in reducing the time necessary to obtain a general idea of the new legislation and to see the relation to one another, and the significance of the various provisions of the Act, Regulations and Orders. In presenting so clear and concise a summary of ttle important provisions the author has displayed marked skill and it is surprising to find that, despite ‘their complicated and intricate details, there are so few cases where the effect of the provision has not been quite correctly stated. It is desirable to draw attention to two of these cases in order that the position may be accurately stated in any further edition of the book. Thus, in the third paragraph of page 13, and also on pages 25 and 58, it is stated that a supplementary scheme should not contain provisions inconsistent with the provisions of the regional scheme which it incorporates; but the reverse is the case, namely, that a supplementary scheme shall incorporate (with or without modifications) all the provisions of the regional scheme which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the supplementary scheme. Again, on page 21 under the heading Landowners,” also on page 28, reference is made to a scheme being proposed in respect of land, to which the proviso to section 6 (2)of the Act applies, by two-thirds and adopted by three-fourths of the owners; such a scheme has to be proposed by the owners of not less than two-thirds of the land and approved by not less than three-fourths of the owners of the land. 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Reoiews

Appended to the volume is the full text of the Town and Country Planning Act, 1932, the Provisional Regulations, 1933 (since made substantive), the Town and Country Planning (General Interim Development) Order, 1933,the Town and Country Planning (General Transitional) Order, 1933, the Acquisition of Land (Assessment of Compensation) Rules, 1919,and the Town Planning (Determination of Questions as to Compensation) Rules, 1926. The inclusion of the Local Land Charges Rules will, no doubt, be considered in connection with further editions. A good detailed index completes a useful book of reference which should be appreciated by all who have to do with the law and procedure of planning.

### X.

TRAINING FOR PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION A German View of Public Administration Was bedeutet und wozu studiert man Vervaltungswissenschaft. Von Dr. WALTERNORDEN,a.0. Professor a.d. Universitat 3erlin. Carl Heymans Verlag. Berlin, 1933. Pp. 50. INhis pamphlet " What is meant by Public Administration and why should it be studied ? " Dr. Norden sets out to demonstrate the need for a special science and study of Public Administration. He opens with a historical survey, showing how the study of Public Administration as an integral whole, developed particularly in Germany under Lorenz von Stein, fell into abeyance owing to the growth of other sciences, each of which treated some aspect of Public Administration from its own particular standpoint-none of which, however, covered the whole field of Public Administration in all its aspects. Of these, the most important was Political Economy, the next, Administrative Law. Professor Norden then passes to a consideration of these special sciences, showing how none of them alone, nor all of them together as they now stand, deals adequately with the subject, and in so doing he develops his own view of Public Administration. He turns first to Administrative Law. Under this he appears to include not simply the law relating to officials and their special position within the State, but all the legal regulations prescribing administrative measures or organisation, including ministerial or departmental decrees and local bye-laws, issued within the framework of a general law. Indeed, Administrative Law often appears to mean simply the study of Public Adininistration from the legal standpoint, embracing not only all those laws which in any way give rise to administrative 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public A dminisfration

activity but also legal cases arising out of administrative practice. Such a study, however, fails to show the organic connection of the public services with the life of the community. It is concerned neither with the motives and needs which give rise to the formation of the public services, nor with the normal practice of the same, both of which should, in Dr. Norden’s view, come within the purview of a science of Public Administration. Each branch of Public Administration leads to some extent its own life and its organisation is derivative from the end which it has to fulfil. It develops from needs felt and a consideration of how they may be satisfied to a crystallised body of laws and regulations which are the end rather than the beginning of the process, a process, moreover, which is continuous. The activity of public officials is a creative one in the sense that much of it is interpretative (particularly in the sphere of local government) while this activity itself in its relation to the public often gives rise to further developments. Public Finance and “ State Economy” are treated more cursorily. Public Finance views Public Administration largely from the standpoint of taxation and its effect on the national welfare. Of recent years the nature and effect of public expenditure has received increased attention, although, to judge from Dr. Norden, the interrelation of public and private enterprise has received too little attention in Germany. Public enterprise has been considered in a category apart, subject to its own peculiar laws, without that organic connection which Professor Norden sees on the strictly administrative side. A word of mild criticism may be inserted here with regard to Dr. Norden’s treatment of Public Finance as affording a clue to the nature of public services. Its study does give some very considerable indication of their character, simply because the manner in which the different services are financed depends to a very large degree upon the particular character of each. However, Dr. Norden’s contention that the financial and economic standpoints alone are not sufficient, is self-evident. He now turns to a definition of the nature and scope of Public Administration, amplifying the view which has emerged during the previous analysis. For him, the fundamental factor which must not be lost from sight, is that every branch of Public Administration is created to serve some need or purpose of the community, and its particular nature is imposed on it largely as a response to this need. Moreover, it tends to self-development, creating the needs which it satisfies. The Education Services are an outstanding example. These needs are not only conscious but of such vital importance to the community that the latter, organised in state, local government 14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Reoiews

bodies, or the guaranteed corporations and societies, undertakes the direct satisfaction of its own needs. Dr. Norden draws an interesting distinction between the public services and private industry. The former being planned and cornelated to meet conscious needs resemble the items in a family budget, whereas industry operates indirectly and without plan or scale of values. Dr. Norden does not conceal his lower opinion of the latter process, but does not approach the question of how or why this difference should arrive. The public services are left perched on a superior moral eminence, their boundaries undefined. The distinguishing principle, we are lett to conclude, is simply this one of urgency and self-consciousness, with strong emphasis on social and cultural considerations. Dr. Norden is thus at pains to contend that Pubhc Administrabon cannot be adequately studied unless it is viewed as a whole and unless account be taken of the social and ideological conditions in which it is rooted. He amves at a view of Public Administration which places it under the head, and almost as the main branch of, " Politics in the classical sense. In fact, he himself makes a somewhat fine distinction between " Politics," which are concerned mainly with what ought to be," the Doctrine of the State " which views public institutions from the generalised standpoint, and Public Administration whose methods are more empirical and whose matter is the particular, rather than the general. So far, the argument has been developed independently of the question of National Socialism. Dr. Norden, however, feels it necessary to take account of new developments in Germany. After claiming a simplification of German administration in that it is now conducted from top to bottom according to one principle only, he goes on to say :-" The enormity of the change, however, lies in the substitution of administrative ' monism ' for the former ' pluralism '; it lies rather in the direction given to the State administrative policy. There is taking place a constant,. thorough, passionate and at the same time well-balanced thinking out and examination of all branches and tasks of public administration. This process has but one end held always in view, to make the latter ' fruitful for the inner regeneration cif the German people, the creation of its unity in a national spirit, and its external strengthening for the maintenance of its existence." The tenns are somewhat general. Further on he says:-" What attitude will the German as ' administrative politician ' take to these facts? If he has no knowledge of history and popular psychology, he may approach the administration of the new Germany with coolness and scepticism, regarding it as an experiment. He, however, who can learn from history and has looked around among other peoples, will amve at the conclusion that for a people like "

### "

### "

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public Administration

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License the Germans, who in almost unparalleled fashion have never, except in times of greatest need, advanced beyond the unbounded cultivation of numerous particular relationships to national self-consciousness, the uniform direction of the whole administration . . . . . to the cultivation of German national consciousness, is both necessary and salutary.” One wonders whether this does not mean simply that those peoples are ripe for despotism which have no natural and organic cohesion. For the world at large and for Germany, however, the significance of National Socialism will probably be found to lie neither in its ideology nor in its philosophy, but in the means which it adopts to achieve its purposes. For instance :(I) The extent to which it refrains from the practice of espionage, sadism, and repression, to secure national uniformity or conformity. (2) The extent to which recruitment to the administrative services is dependent on educational qualifications only and independent of party associations. (3) The extent to which the dominant political party refrains from interference with the discipline and established rights of the administrative services. But Dr. Norden when he deals with National Socialism does not beat of these concrete and practical questions. The interest of Dr. Norden’s argument, however, does not lie in his treatment of National Socialism but in his general thesis. In fact, closer analysis shows that his main argument does not really apply to a State which is both despotic and totalitarian, since the latter cannot claim that its institutions are the organic expression of communal needs. During the course of the argument two other subsidiary views of Public Administration emerge. Sometimes it would seem that in the public services the “ social ” aim is paramount and it is this, rather than the planned fulfilment of definite ends which gives them their peculiar character. At other times, administration is regarded as being essentially static, in contrast to industry which is creative-a view which somewhat contradicts his main thesis. Finally, Dr. Norden makes a plea for the study of Public Administration not simply because it can be of use to the future civil servant, but as a training for citizenship. Unfortunately, the scholastic language in which the pamphlet is written, its constant employment of generalisations whose exact meaning is difficult to define, obscures the structure of the otherwise interesting argument. M. L. DHONAU.

Other Books Received Books received include the following :Title. Changing Structure of Amencan Banking Reconstruction Principles and Problems of Federal Finance Wages, Cost of Living, and National Income in Sweden, Val. I Wages, Cost of Living, and National Income in Sweden, VOl. I1 British Association for the Advancement of Science, Report of Annual Meeting Outlines of Central Government, including the Judicial System of England Local Government of the United Kingdom and the Irish Free Author. R. W. Goldschmidt Publisher. Routledge Harold Macmillan B. P. Adarker hfacmillan P. S. King univ. of Stockholm

### P. S. King
univ. of Stockholm

### P. s. King

British Association. Burlington House J. J. Clarke

### I. Pitman

### J. J. Clarke

### I. Pitman

### State

International Survey of Social Services, Studies and Reports Broadcasting Hilda Matheson Frank H. Knight Risk, Uncertainty and Profit Collected Works of Carl Menger, Vol. 11 Rating and Valuation Acts, G. P. Warner-Terry 1925-1932 Lord Enstace Percy Government in Transition Australia in the World Crisis, Douglas Copland Civic Heraldry C. W. Sc~tt-GileS Monopoly, a History and Theory Vernon A. Mund Law and Organisation of the N. E. Mustoe British Civil Service Work and Wealth in a Modem P. Ford Port G. M. Trevelyan England under Queen Ann+ The Peace and the Protestant Succession Fundamentals of Industrial Ad- E. T. Elboume ministration Schools, 1934 The Municipal Year Book, 1934 Edited by James Forbes The Soviet State Bertram W. Maxwell

### -

P. s. King Thornton Butterworth L. S. E. L. S. E. Chas. Knight Methuen Cambridge Univ. Press Dent & Son Humphrey Milford I. Pitman Allen & Unwin Longmans Macdonald & Evans Truman & Knightly . Municipal Journal, Ltd. Steves & Waybum, Kansas, U S A .

### -

14679299, 1934, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1934.tb01905.x by The University Of Queensland, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

### Public Adminisfration
