### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST I049

### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST *

IT is the thesis of this essay that all powers granted to a corporation or to the management of a corporation, or to any group within the corporation, whether derived from statute or charter or both, are necessarily and at all times exercisable only for the ratable benefit of all the shareholders as their interest appears. That, in consequence, the use of the power is subject to equitable limitation when the power has been exercised to the detriment of such interest, however absolute the grant of power may be in terms, and however correct the technical exercise of it may have been. That many of the rules nominally regulating certain specific uses of corporate powers are only outgrowths of this fundamental equitable limitation and are consequently subject to be modified, discarded, or strengthened, when necessary in order to achieve such benefit and protect such interest; and that entirely new remedies may be worked out in substitution for or supplemental to existing remedies. And that, in every case, corporate action must be twice tested: first, by the technical rules having to do with the existence and proper exercise of the power; second, by equitable rules somewhat analogous to those which apply in favor of a cestui que trust to the trustee's exercise of wide powers granted to him in the instrument making him a fiduciary. The question is not academic. Its solution in the sense suggested would give greater flexibility to corporate managements in certain respects. It would permit them, when the action is actually necessary or beneficial, to do things in the doing of which
* In preparing this article, the author is indebted for assistance and suggestions

(i) The rule that the incoming shareholder must make a contribution


CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST I053 the real value of patents can only be determined after the invention is introduced and in use.` Accordingly the quality of the property was referred back to the question of valuation; and in respect to patents this is generally the rule. It will be noticed that this is a less rigid rule, permitting more latitude, and permitting protection of the interests actually involved. A contract for the services of an outsider to help publish a history has been held not " property " within the meaning of these statutes.6 Goodwill -well understood as property in other fields of law, and differing from tangible property only in that it is more difficult to reduce to definite appraisal-has been treated both ways; one case disallowed it completely; 7 others left the question open for the determination of the possibility of a demonstrable valuation.8 Once in the valuation field, judicial modification of liberty of action becomes even more striking. Both of the principal rules on the subject -the rule that stock may be issued for property at its " absolute value," as over and against the rule that stock may be issued for property upon such valuation as reasonable business men would approve under the circumstances - merely Insurance Press Co. v. Montauk Co., 103 App. Div. 472, 475, 93 N. Y. Supp. 134, 136-37 (1905). 6 Stevens v. Episcopal Church History Co., 140 App. Div. 570, 125 N. Y. Supp. 573 (i9io). But see Van Cott v. Van Brunt, 82 N. Y. 535 (i88o), where the work done had to be paid for in stock and such stock was issued in good faith. The issue was upheld even though the labor might not be worth the par value of the stock issued.

### 7 Coleman v. Booth, 268 Mo. 64, i86 S. W. 102I (I9I6), a case weakened by


CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST I055 ment find much favor in any court. The "good faith"? phrase is merely a shorthand way of saying that the directors must use their power to test the quality and appraise the value of the consideration offered for stock in such a manner that creditors and shareholders will not be hurt. This is, in rough outline, the result of the cases down to the advent of non-par stock. With the appearance of this device legal concern for the protection of the creditors largely passed away.12 There remained the proper protection of the interests of the other shareholders; and this consideration at once became paramount. Commencing with the decision that non-par stock could not be issued for nothing, as a bonus,13 there ensued a decision holding that such stock must be issued at approximately equal prices at the same time to all concerned.14 This decision was subsequently modified by the Circuit Court of Appeals into a rule that where there is an inequality of consideration exacted, reasons nmust appear justifying the board of directors in making the distinction.15 And the test of justification was whether the amount of consideration required was or was not sufficient to operate as a protection to the remaining shareholders. (2) The rule that after stock has been issued additional stock may be issued only (a) at a price or under circumstances which protect the equities of the existing shareholders or (b) in accordance with a scheme which permits the existing shareholders to protect their equities by subscribing for a ratable amount of the additional stock. When the stock is without nominal or par value, there is usually direct authority, as clear as can be derived from words, permitting 299 (H. L.), in which both the majority and the dissenters agreed that there was nothing essentially impossible in such an agreement, but differed as to whether the text of the statute involved permitted it. 12 Johnson v. Louisville Trust Co., 293 Fed. 857, 862 (C. C. A. 6th, 1923), the court saying: " The generally, if not universally, accepted theory of the purpose of such statutes is that they are intended to do away with both the 'trust fund' and 'holding out ' doctrines." The court approved Mr. Cook's remark that the whole theory of stock without par value is to let the buyer beware and let the creditor beware. 13 Stone v. Young, 2io App. Div. 303, 206 N. Y. Supp. 95 (I924), the court saying that the no par stock statute is " no warrant for the gratuitous distribution." 14 Hodgman v. Atlantic Refining Co., 3oo Fed. 590 (D. Del. 1924).

### 15 Atlantic Refining Co. v. Hodgman, I3 F.(2d) 78I (C. C. A. 3d, I926).


I056 HARVARD LAW REVIEW the directors of a corporation to issue stock as they see fit, when they see fit, and for any price they see fit. Prima facie this would appear to be an absolute power. Actually, however, courts have controlled this power almost from the time its implications became apparent. And there is manifestly no difference between the issue of non-par stock and the issue of stock having par value, except that in the latter case statutes and charters prescribe a minimum issue price (the par value) payable in a more or less restricted form (cash, property of approved quality, services actually rendered). The situation is approximately the same in both cases, however, barring only this statutory restriction. Even statutory restrictions involving a minimum price upon the issue of par value stock have been swept away by the courts under circumstances in which it appeared that the position of the corporation did not permit the issue of par value stock for its par value,6 but in these cases the courts required that it should be made to appear both that the stockholders had assented or were protected under all the circumstances, and that creditors would not be prejudiced. Faced even with an apparent restriction, the courts evolved an equitable principle to the effect that under the circumstances indicated the restriction could be ignored. Early in the history of corporation law the equitable principle was developed that prima facie the directors, despite their power to issue stock, must so issue it that the stockholders would be given an opportunity to protect their equities by subscribing to ratable shares of new stock. This rule, evolved in I807 in Gray v. Portland Bank,17 probably was misunderstood by the bar and by courts generally. An examination of the facts in that case makes it plain that the court did not undertake to lay down a piece of judicial legislation requiring the management to offer stock promiscuously to all shareholders. The court did hold that in that particular situation the issue of additional shares without permitting a shareholder to subscribe impaired his equity.18 Judge Sewall 16 Handley v. Stutz, I39 U. S. 4I7 (I89I).

### 17 3 Mass. 363 (I807).

### 18 It is noticeable that the court was preoccupied with working out a remedy.


### I058 HARVARD LAW REVIEW
clined to extend the right to treasury stock; 2 New Jersey vice-chancellor who was pressed for a quick decision over a lunch hour led to the evolution of a third exception - the issue of stock for property.23 None of these exceptions, perhaps, need have been labored as the courts evolving them seemed to think necessary. It would have been simpler to observe that the circumstances in respect to these particular transactions required no preemptive right to protect adequately the interests of the existing shareholders. The case finally came up of an additional issue of preferred stock which could not by any possibility affect either the amount of the equity of existing shareholders or their proportionate voting control; the New Jersey court was forced to say that in such circumstances there was no reason for the rule and it thereupon disappeared.24 Commentators on this situation, with varying degrees of emphasis but with considerable unanimity, have been forced to two conclusions: first, that the preemptive right, while a rough and ready protection to common shareholders in a corporation having only a simple capital structure, did not fit many situations where there was a complex capital structure, and frequently was unnecessary even in the simpler cases; second, that the so-called preemptive right was not a right at all, but a remedy - a remedy evolved out of equitable principles
- and that unless a situation appeared calling for a remedy and

### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST 1059
of preemptive rights is that the doctrine arose from an attempt to impose an equitable limitation on an apparently absolute power of directors to issue stock; that it should never have hardened into a rigid rule of law, and that it should revert to its original status as a remedy, available in equity and possibly, by transposition, at law. But it should be considered merely as one of many possible remedies - certainly not an exclusive one and not necessarily the best one. In cases where, by reason of the exceptions to the preemptive right doctrine, no such right existed, courts have had no difficulty in applying equitable remedies of other sorts and kinds. Thus a Wisconsin court enjoined the issue of shares where the sole motive was to permit the directors to augment a rapidly melting majority; 26 a federal court insisted that a sale of treasury shares must be made either at public auction or at a price which demonstrably would maintain the equities of the existing shareholders.27 Non-par stock without a preemptive right was held to be of such nature that the price paid for it must adequately protect the existing equities.28 At this point, however, courts ran into a familiar business situation. Not infrequently it is worthwhile to have a substantial shareholder even though equities are sacrificed to bring him in. Such was the case in Atlantic Refining Co. v. Hodgman,29 and the situation being made plain, the court sanctioned a scheme by which existing equities of approximately $I6 were sacrificed to permit the entrance of the Atlantic Refining Company on payment of $8 a share in view of the added strength which that company lent to the issuing corporation through its connections, its goodwill, and its business tactics. So, a Delaware court sanctioned the issue of non-par stock at $25 a share, though its market value was $40 a share, where it appeared that the stock was being offered preemptively to existing shareholders and that the offer of such stock at a low price made 26 Luther v. Luther Co., ii8 Wis. II2, 94 N. W. 69 (I903). 27 Borg v. International Silver Co., 2 F.(2d) 9g0 (S. D. N. Y. I924). The history of the handling of the sale of this block of treasury stock is peculiarly interesting as an exercise of the equitable power to protect shareholders in the case of stock freed from the so-called technical rule of preemptive right.

### 28 Atlantic Refining Co. v. Hodgman, I3 F.(2d) 78I (C. C. A. 3d, 1926);


io6o HARVARD LAW REVIEW it possible for the corporation to obtain issued to outsiders with full knowledge o The language of the Delaware court in c of no par stock is interesting not merely such stock, but for its bearing on the ge After pointing out the absolute authorit issue such stock at any price they deemed

### " The statute does not impose any restraint
bridled power of the directors. Whether equ the principles which prompt it to restrain a in absolute terms, lay its restraining hand u an abuse of this absolute power, is another q ently considered and answered in the affirm the absolute character of the language in whic is expressed, it cannot be that a court of equ cases to circumscribe it. The section requir consideration. It certainly would be out of court could review their action in fixing it.>?

### And the court went on to point out th
situation of fiduciaries; and while not " tr of the term, yet for convenience they such."

### The foregoing is by no means a complete resume of the limita-
tions which courts have thrown around the issue of shares despite an apparently absolute power granted to the management. Enough has been said, however, to indicate the completeness with which the apparently absolute power has been circumscribed, and the principal lines of limitation which have been thrown around this power. B. The power to declare or withhold dividends must be so used as to tend to the benefit not only of the corporation as a whole but also of all of its shareholders to the extent that this is possible.

### Among the rules worked out are:

(i) The rule that dividends must be withheld only for a business

### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST io6i

### The statute and charter alike accord to the directors the power

### Io62 HARVARD LAW REVIEW.

### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST I063


io64 HARVARD LAW REVIEW poration purchases stock in another, such purchase must tend to forward the " primary " purpose of the corporation; as one court said,

### " whether the purchase of stock in one corporation by another is ultra

### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST I065


### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST I067


io68 HARVARD LAW REVIEW as to " confiscate " the rights of the minority, nor so as to oppress them unreasonably.4" The mere power concentrated in the hands of, say, a parent corporation, or of the management itself, appears to be tested by rules almost exactly like those applicable to boards of directors. Where the majority power is in fact exercised by or through the management or its control, courts take cognizance of that fact.48 To the principle of equitable control of the power to amend the certificate of incorporation, there seems to be not a single exception in any American jurisdiction. The stringency of the control varies. In substantially all states it is held that no amendment of the certificate of incorporation can interfere with certain specific rights. The principal example of this is the right of a holder of accumulative preferred stock to be protected against any amendment which disturbs accrued unpaid cumulative dividends.49 This is familiarly spoken of as a " vested right," though the phrase states a conclusion rather than an argument. As a matter of strict English, the right to have unpaid cumulative dividends charged as a preference against the net assets of the corporation seems not different in kind from the right to receive a preference on liquidation up to a stated amount. As such, the former would seem to be as subject to amendment as the latter under a reserved power to alter "preferences." Nevertheless, practically every case on the subject prohibits an amendment modifying accrued cumulative dividends, substantially on the theory that to do so is an oppression of the preferred shareholder. 47 New Haven & Derby R. R. v. Chapman, 38 Conn. 56 (i870); Perkins v. Coffin, 84 Conn. 275, 79 Atl. I070 (i9ii); Lonsdale Corp. v. International Mercantile Marine Co., ioi N. J. Eq. 554, I39 Atl. 50 (I927); Kent v. Quicksilver Mining Co., 78 N. Y. I59 (I879).

### 48 Central Trust Co. v. Bridges, 57 Fed. 753 (C. C. A. 6th, I893); Kavanaugh
v. Kavanaugh Knitting Co., 226 N. Y. I85, I23 N. E. I48 (IgIg). The same rule in a different form appears in Farmers' Loan & Trust Co. v. New York & Northern Ry., I5o N. Y. 4IO, 44 N. E. I043 (I896). See also Outwater v. Public Serv. Corp. of New Jersey, infra note 56.

### 49 Yoakum v. Providence Biltmore Hotel Co., 34 F.(2d) 533 (D. R. I. I929);


### CORPORATE POWERS AS POWERS IN TRUST i o6g


### I070 HARVARD LAW REVIEW


### 1072 HARVARD LAW REVIEW
trust. The court took occasion to say: " The fraud or breach of trust of one who occupies a fiduciary relation while in the exercise of a lawful power is as fatal in equity to the resultant act or contract as the absence of the power." 5 In a New York case, Colby v. Equitable Trust Co.,6" the court faced a situation in which there was a dilution of the stock in one of the merging corporations. On examination, however, the business situation indicated that that corporation had been running a losing race and was facing an uninviting future. The court, taking these facts into consideration, came to the conclusion that the merger was not "so unfair and unconscionable . . . that a court of equity should interfere and prevent its consummation." There are many similar cases. Though an equitable limitation was applied in favor of pro rata control when additional stock was issued, the fact that proportionate control is diluted by a process of merger seems not to be persuasive.6" Whether this is because courts-today take a more realistic view and recognize pro rata control as not being worth very much, or because its loss is not a sufficient consideration to over-balance the business interests involved, does not appear; but few students of corporate problems will quarrel with the conclusion. Though by no means complete, the foregoing substantially summarizes the position of courts in regard to the power to consummate a merger. Save in Pennsylvania, where an archaic rule requires that no merger be consummated unless the shareholder is given an option to be paid out in cash,62 the equitable limitation seems undisputed; and even under the Pennsylvania rule it would appear that the courts involved were struggling for an automatic right compensating the shareholder for his loss of position, much as the Massachusetts court in Gray v. Portland Bank struggled for such a right. It is singular that no generalization has been attempted covering equitable control over situations where statute and charter have '59 I44 Fed. at 77I.

### 60 I24 App. Div. 262, io8 N. Y. Supp. 978 (I908).


### 1074 HARVARD LAW REVIEW

### In this concept, corporation law becomes in substance a branch
