### HARVARD


### II46 R ARVARD LAW REVIEW

FOR WHOM ARE CORPORATE MANAGERS TRUSTEES? II47 is-an association of stockholders formed for their private gain and to be managed by its board of directors solely with that end in view. Directors and managers of modern large corporations are granted all sorts of novel powers by present-day corporation statutes and charters, and are free from any substantial supervision by stockholders by reason of the difficulty which the modern stockholder has in discovering what is going on and taking effective measures even if he has discovered it. The fact that managers so empowered not infrequently act as though maximum stockholder profit was not the sole object of managerial activities has led some students of corporate problems, particularly Mr. A. A. Berle, to advocate an increased emphasis on the doctrine that managerial powers are held in trust for stockholders as sole beneficiaries of the corporate enterprise.5 The present writer is thoroughly in sympathy with Mr. Berle's efforts to establish a legal control which will more effectually prevent corporate managers from diverting profit into their own pockets from those of stockholders, and agrees with many of the specific rules which the latter deduces from his trusteeship, principle.6 He nevertheless believes that it is undesirable, even with 5 See Berle, Corporate Powers as Powers in Trust (1931) 44 HARV. L. REV. I049. 6 That directors are fiduciaries for their corporations is indisputable. That many of their powers, such as the power of declaring or passing dividends and the power of issuing new stock, may affect the individual interests of the stockholders rather than the corporate enterprise as a whole is obvious and has led to a growing tendency to treat directors as fiduciaries for stockholders as well as for the corporate entity. Thus, a stockholder may under some circumstances compel the declaration of a dividend even though the corporate entity would not be injured by the failure to declare. Dodge v. Ford Motor Co., supra note 3; In re Brantman, 244 Fed. ioi (C. C. A. 2d, I9I7). A stockholder may also enjoin the issue. of new stock by directors where the purpose of the issue is to change the control of the enterprise, even though the issue may not injure the corporation and even though the stockholder may not under the circumstances have any contractual preemptive right to have the stock issued to him. Elliott v. Baker, I94 Mass. 5V8, 8o N. E. 450 (1907); Luther v. C. J. Luther Co., ii8 Wis. II2, 94 N. W. 69 (1903); see Dunlay v. Avenue M. Garage & R. R., 253 N. Y. 274, 279, 170 N. E. 917, 919 (1930). It may be questioned, however, whether some of the problems which Mr. Berle treats as fiduciary problems -e.g., that relating to dividends on non-cumulative preferred stock-are not questions of contract rather than of fiduciary law. Cf. Wabash Ry. v. Barclay, 280 U. S. 197 (1930). A further controversy as to the fiduciary duties of management when management is vested not in directors but in a particular group of stockholders is beyond the scope of the present article. See BERLE, STUDIES IN THE LAW OF CORPORATION FINANCE (I928) c. 3. But cf. Wood,

### The Status of Management Stockholders (I928) 38 YALE L. J. 57.


### 1148 HARVARD LAW REVIEW


FOR WHOM ARE CORPORATE MANAGERS TRUSTEES? II5I of a single system to such an extent as to justify the Interstate Commerce Commission in dividing the joint rates charged by connecting carriers between those carriers in such a way as to increase the resources of the weaker roads by giving them a disproportionately large share of the total.

### Although this single system concept has thus far been confined

### II52 HARVARD LAW REVIEW
bility of methods of economic planning by which such security can be achieved in much greater degree than at present. This belief is no longer confined to radical opponents of the capitalistic system; it has come to be shared by many conservatives who believe that capitalism is worth saving but that it can not permanently survive under modern conditions unless it treats the economic security of the worker as one of its obligations and is intelligently directed so as to attain that object.2' It is true that, as many advocates of industrial planning have pointed out, high wages and economic security for workers tend in the main to increase the profits of stockholders, inasmuch as they tend to increase consumption of the things which business corporations produce.22 It can not, however, be successfully maintained that the sort of industrial planning which may be found desirable to protect the employee is necessarily under all circumstances in line with the interest of the stockholders of each individual corporation. If contemporary discussion of the need for a planned economic order ultimately results in a more stabilized system of production and employment, we may safely predict that this will involve some further modifications of the maximum-profit-for-the-stockholders -of -the-individual-company formula. It may, however, be forcibly urged that all these and other past, present, and possible future limitations on the pursuit of stockholder profit in no way alter the theory that the sole function of directors and other corporate managers is to seek to obtain the maximum amount of profits for the stockholders as owners of the enterprise. Ownership of a modern railroad may today be hedged about with restrictions which make such ownership considerably less absolute than was the ownership of a cotton mill at the time when economic and legal theories of laissez faire were most completely accepted. Ownership in the cotton industry tomorrow may be even more restricted in some ways than is recently been investigated. See LAIDLER, CONCENTRATION OF CONTROL IN AMERICAN

### INDUSTRY (1931).

### 21 See, e.g., DONHAM, BUSINESS ADRIFT (93I) passim; TIIE SWOPE PLAN

(Frederick editor, 193); Address of Daniel Willard, President of Baltimore & Ohio R. R. in AMERICA FACES TIIE FUTURE (Beard editor, I932) 29; Butler, Unemployment, id. at I4I.

### 22 E.g., DONHAM, BUSINESS ADRIFT I29-37; THE SWOPE PLAN 20.


FOR WHOM ARE CORPORATE MANAGERS TRUSTEES? II55 growing sense of trusteeship which I have described. One no longer feels the obligation to take from labor for the benefit of capital, nor to take from the public for the benefit of both, but rather to administer wisely and fairly in the interest of all." 25

### More recently Mr. Young's colleague, President Swope of the

General Electric Company, has put forward his plan for the stabilization of industry which is based on the idea that "organized industry should take the lead, recognizing its responsibility to its employees, to the public, and to its stockholders rather than that democratic society should act through its government." 26 That industry as at present organized can take this lead only through the agency of the directors and corporate executives who manage it is obvious and is tacitly assumed by Mr. Swope. As Professor Beard has put it in commenting on the Swope plan, " Mr. Swope spoke as a man of affairs, as president of the General Electric Company. No academic taint condemned his utterance in advance; no suspicion of undue enthusiasm clouded his product. As priest-kings could lay down the law without question in primitive society, so a captain of industry in the United States could propose a new thing without encountering the scoffs of the wise or the jeers of the practical." 27 In his recent study of the situation which confronts American business today, Dean Donham of the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration has stated the problem as follows: "How can we as business men, within the areas for which we are responsible, best meet the needs of the American people, most nearly approximate supplying their wants, maintain profits, handle problems of unemployment, face the Russian challenge, and at the same time aid Europe and contribute most to or disturb least the cause of international peace? "28 Answering this question he says, "The only way to defend capitalism is through leadership which accepts social responsibility and meets the sound needs of the great majority of our 25 Address of Owen D. Young, January, I929, quoted in SEARS, THE NEW PLACE OF THE STOCKHOLDER (I929) 209. Cf. WORMSER, FRANKENSTEIN, INCORPORATED

### (I93I) C. 8.

26 THE SWOPE PLAN 22. 27 AMERICA FACES THE FUTURE i86.

### 28 DONHAM, BUSINESS ADRIFT 38.


II56 HARVARD LAW REVIEW people. Such leadership will seek to form constructive plans framed not in the interest of capital or capitalism but in the interest of the American people as a whole. . . . The responsibility of capital for leadership is overwhelming. To a large extent in this industrial civilization of ours the potential leadership of the country is concentrated in industry." 29 Dean Donham does not explicitly state that leadership of industry is in the hands of those who do not own it but he is too well-informed an observer of modern business not to be thoroughly aware that such is the case. Assumption of social responsibility by industrial leadership necessarily means assumption of such responsibility by corporate managers.

### The view that those who manage our business corporations


### II58 HARVARD LAW REVIEW

Nevertheless there are indications that even today corporation managers not infrequently use corporate funds in ways which suggest a social responsibility rather than an exclusively profitmaking viewpoint. Take, for example, the matter of gifts by business corporations to local charities. The orthodox legal attitude toward such gifts is well stated in the following language of Lord Bowen: " Charity has no business to sit at boards of directors qua charity. There is, however, a kind of charitable dealing which is for the interest of those who practise it, and to that extent and in that garb (I admit not a very philanthropic garb) charity may sit at the board, but for no other purpose." 32 Other courts have expressed substantially the same view, which is generally regarded as representing the law on the subject.33 There is, however, another viewpoint which is undoubtedly becoming widely prevalent with laymen if not with lawyers. Most local charities are designed to carry on relief work which, if not thus carried on, might be undertaken as a public enterprise supported by taxareduction in prices were relied upon as justifying a decree compelling the declaration of a dividend out of the large surplus of the company. Neither the language of the opinion nor the relief granted necessarily involves an unqualified acceptance of the maximum-profit-for-stockholders formula. The opinion states that " a business corporation is organized and carried on primarily for the profit of the stockholders " and that directors cannot lawfully " conduct the affairs of a corporation for the merely incidental benefit of shareholders and for the primary purpose of benefiting others." 204 Mich. at 507, I70 N. W. at 684. Despite testimony of Mr. Ford that he planned to expand the enterprise in the interest of consumers rather than of stockholders, the court was careful so to limit its decree as not to interfere seriously with the expansion program. Its avowed reason for so doing was that expansion might be made profitable despite Mr. Ford's expressed indifference to profit. One may suspect that it was also motivated, consciously or unconsciously, by a reluctance to prevent the growth of a socially important enterprise. 32 Hutton v. West Cork Ry., 23 Ch. D. 654, 673 (i883). " The law does not say that there are to be no cakes and ale, but there are to be no cakes and ale except such as are required for the benefit of the company." Ibid. 33 The present tendency is to take a liberal view of what gifts may reasonably be thought by the directors to be for the financial benefit of the corporation. Cf. Evans v. Brunner, Mond & Co., go L. J. Ch. 294 (I920); Armstrong Cork Co. v. H. A. Meldrum Co., 285 Fed. 58 (W. D. N. Y. I922). Many of the recent cases on corporate gifts involve the deductibility of the gift from income under the federal income tax act as an " ordinary and necessary expense incurred in carrying on trade or business." Here also the modern cases take a liberal view of what may be to the business advantage of the company. Cf. Corning Glass Works v. Lucas, 37

### F.(2d) 798 (App. D. C. I929); American Rolling Mill Co. v. Commissioner of


FOR WHOM ARE CORPORATE MANAGERS TRUSTEES? II59 tion. As recent efforts to relieve unemployment indicate, one community may rely wholly on charitable contributions for what another community may undertake with public funds. Where taxation is the method used, corporate, like individual wealth, contributes. There is a widespread feeling that it should also contribute where the voluntary method is employed. Lists of contributors to such charitable enterprises as community chests and unemployment relief funds indicate that donations by corporations, even by those whose employees are unlikely to share in any great part in the funds, are becoming frequent.34 Conceivably, a stockholder advantage may result thereby through the creation of good will, but the suggestion that charitable gifts increase the good will of a corporation as a business enterprise assumes that the public no longer whole-heartedly believes in the principle that corporations have no right to be charitable. The view that directors may within limits properly use corporate funds to support charities which are important to the welfare of the community in which the corporation does business probably comes much nearer representing the attitude of public opinion and the present corporate practice than does the traditional language of courts and lawyers. Nor are there wanting signs of the adoption of a more liberal attitude by legislatures 3 and judges.36 Such a view is difficult to justify if we insist on thinking of the business corporation as merely an aggregate of stockholders with 34 For example, the New York Telephone Company is said to have spent $233,- ooo for charity during the past three years, including $I30,000 for unemployment relief. The New York Public Service Commission has recently ruled that such contributions must be charged against surplus and not to operating expenses. See (I932) 70 NEW REPUBLIC 2I9. 35 Cf. Tex. Acts I9I7, C. I5, ?? I, 3; construed in James McCord Co. v. Citizens' Hotel Co., 287 S. W. 906 (Tex. Civ. App. I926); N. Y. Laws I93I, SUPP. C. 24, ? 33.

### 36 "Again, we see no reason why if a railroad company desires to foster, en-

ii6o HARVARD LAW REVIEW directors and officers chosen by them as their trustees or agents. It is not for a trustee to be public-spirited with his beneficiary's property. But we are not bound to treat the corporation as a mere aggregate of stockholders. The traditional view of our law is that a corporation is a distinct legal entity. Unfortunately, its entity character has been thought of as something conferred upon it by the state which, by a mysterious rite called incorporation, magically produces " e pluribus unum." The present vogue of legal realism breeds dissatisfaction with such legal mysteries and leads to insistence on viewing the corporation as it really is. So viewing it we may, as many do, insist that it is a mere aggregate of stockholders; but there is another way of regarding it which has distinguished adherents. According to this concept any organized group, particularly if its organization is of a permanent character, is a factual unit, "a body which from no fiction of law but from the very nature of things differs from the individuals of whom it is constituted." 3

### If the unity of the corporate body is real, then there is reality
and not simply legal fiction in the proposition that the managers of the unit are fiduciaries for it and not merely for its individual members, that they are, in Mr. Young's phrase, trustees for an institution rather than attorneys for the stockholders. As previously stated, this entity approach will not substantially affect our results if we insist that the sole function for the entity is to seek maximum stockholder profit. But need we so assume? We have seen that the law has already reached the point, particularly in the public utility field, where it compels business enterprises to recognize to some extent the interests of other persons besides their owners. We have seen further that the same trend of public opinion which may in some cases compel such recognition may in other cases encourage and approve it without compelling it. A sense of social responsibility toward employees, consumers, and the general public may thus come to be regarded as the appropriate attitude to be adopted by those who are engaged in business, with the result that those who own their own busi87 DICEY, LAW AND PUBLIC OPINION IN ENGLAND (3d ed. I920) I65. Cf. Laski, The Personality of Associations (I9I6) 29 HARV. L. REV. 404. See also United Mine

### Workers v. Coronado Coal Co., 259 U. S. 344 (I922); Taff Vale Ry. v. Amalgamated

### Soc. of Ry. Serva-nts, [I90I] A. C. 426.


### FOR WHOM ARE CORPORATE MANAGERS TRUSTEES? ii6i
nesses and are free to do what they like may increasingly adopt such an attitude. Business ethics may thus tend to become in some degree those of a profession rather than of a trade. Such a development of business ethics which goes beyond the requirements of law and beyond the dictates of enlightened selfinterest is impossible in these days when most business is incorporated unless it can touch incorporated business enterprises as well as those conducted by individual owners. As a practical matter, this can happen only if the managers of such corporations have some degree of legal freedom to act upon such an attitude without waiting for the unanimous consent of the stockholders. That the duty of the managers is to employ the funds of the corporate institution which they manage solely for the purposes of their institution is indisputable. That that purpose, both factually and legally, is maximum stockholder profit has commonly been assumed by lawyers. That such is factually the purpose of the stockholders in creating the association may be granted. Nevertheless, the association, once it becomes a going concern, takes its place in a business world with certain ethical standards which appear to be developing in the direction of increased social responsibility. If we think of it as an institution which differs in the nature of things from the individuals who compose it, we may then readily conceive of it as a person, which, like other persons engaged in business, is affected not only by the laws which regulate business but by the attitude of public and business opinion as to the social obligations of business. If business is tending to become a profession, then a corporate person engaged in business is a professional even though its stockholders, who take no active part in the conduct of the business, may not be. Those through whom it acts may therefore employ its funds in a manner appropriate to a person practising a profession and imbued with a sense of social responsibility without thereby being guilty of a breach of trust.

### It may well be that any substantial assumption of social respon-


### FOR WHOM ARE CORPORATE MANAGERS TRUSTEES? II63
