SPEAKER 0
Sorry. Hi, good morning everyone. Or sorry, good afternoon everyone. Um, you are in the right place, you're probably wondering who I am. My name's John Reitti, I'm a learning designer in the Bell faculty and I'm helping Rada with some elements of her course this semester. I hope the semesters started very well for you. Uh, RDA I think is online, in the corner there of the screen on the right-hand side. What I'm going to do this morning just for a few minutes is explain how you, Go about the first assessment task which you would have seen in RADA's announcement, the, Interactive oral assessment, um. It's a partner meeting, so why are we doing this? Well, in the not so distant future, you'll be sitting in a law firm and. Someone like the partner is gonna ask you. To um, Try and do some research on a problem that one of the clients bring. And basically you'll be asked to do, to prepare a briefing note. And then you will have a conversation with the partner, because the partner wants to find out, OK, how do we tackle this problem for the client. So it's very authentic uh experience. So just to show you what you need to do, and I've noticed about 150 of you have already signed up for a time slot. So you need to select one time slot, only one. Um, I've had a few people thinking they've gotta do one for each of weeks 56, and 7. That's not the case. You select one and you choose which week you would like to have your partner meeting. OK, it's, It is an oral assessment in a sense, but in another I'd like to think of it, it's a professional conversation. Which you're going to have. Like you were in the in the workplace. So if you haven't signed up for a group yet, what you need to do if you see the screen on the right-hand side is select groups. Oh, OK, oh there we go. And a number of these slots have already been taken. But if you see join, that means you can join these slots. They're spread across week 5 to week 7. So if you pick one. And you've joined that time slot and you find out later on uh really, um I would prefer, To do it on this day at this time, you can simply move to that group. And what it does is it takes you from your original selection and takes you to your new selection. Right, so that's the first thing you need to do, about half the cohort have done that so far, so thank you very much. If you, Need to see a video on how to do that again if, Under assessment in your blackboard site and under be my clerk. Have all the resources there and one of them is actually a very short video just showing what I've just shown you. So it's the time slot and the problem that you solve is dependent on which week you choose. So if you are, In a time slot for week 5. You will get a problem next week. Week 3, OK, and that will be up here in Blackboard. OK and then you basically have. About 2 weeks to prepare the briefing note, prepare yourself for the meeting, which is in week 5. If your partner meeting is in week 6, It will be a problem which comes in week 4. If your partner meeting is in week 7. It's the problem in week 5, OK, so, on the Mondays of week 34 and 5, we will publish the problem. That the partner is trying to solve. All good so far. OK. Now, when you prepare your briefing note. You go to this link here and be my clerk. You open it up and it goes to a platform which is called Catmys. You just basically go into that. And on the left-hand side here, and you can open it up. You will see all the instructions. OK, and these instructions are the same whether you're doing problem 3 week 5, or problem week 4 for week 6 or 5 for week 7. And you go through, looks through the instructions. Gives you an idea of what to put into the briefing note. For the problem. Some information about the partner meeting and then down the bottom. Is a checklist, which is designed to help you sort of step your way through, all the things you need to do to prepare a really good briefing note, which in turn is gonna really prepare you well for the partner meeting. If you want to write some notes, uh, there's this tab at the top left here. There's already um suggested checklists but you know you can add your own notes in here or wherever like um. I'm not sure if that's a thing really, but um just to show you, you can use that, and then you can on the right-hand side, Start drafting. OK, and you basically got up until the day before your scheduled partner meeting to put it together. Alright. Um, so you can dip in and out and, uh, it kinda works like Google Docs, whereas, As you type away Etc. and. It even helps with how you write it, so for example if I um copy and paste this in, it's actually going to say OK well um perhaps you need to look at paraphrasing, gives you some tips on how to do that. Which is good practise anyway, so you know you're going to go and find some research, you, you may even be using AI which is fine, but of course we want you to use that in the right way, in a professional way, in an ethical way, and it gives you some tips on how, how to help your writing in that sense. When you're ready to submit, you click this button on the top right-hand side. And tick the boxes here, one's about your academic integrity, you agree to that, and in terms of your ethical use of generative AI submit as your final work. And we have connected this with Turnitin, so after a little while you will get a similarity score. The idea of giving you the similarity score is for for learning. So if you see that's pretty high, you obviously should do something about it and learn about writing and paraphrasing and referencing. And you can go back and if you wish you can. You know, right up until the day before your um partner meeting, do some edits and submit again. Um, and you should also receive in your email, uh, Acknowledgement that you have submitted that. Now the idea is to get the briefing note up. Into this platform before the partner meeting, the day before, your partner, the assessor will have a quick look at the briefing note. And um, Use that as a starting point for your conversation, work conversation with the partner, so I'll be asking things around um, You know, your findings, your legal reasoning, that type of thing. Now keep in mind too. There is an assessment rubric here. If you go on the left-hand side down, very bottom there's um an attached file. Make sure that you look through that, because basically, This is what you're assessed on, this is what we expect in the briefing note, this is what we expect in terms of your responses during that partner meeting. OK, any questions? Yes, Well, let's make an end of business. Yeah. OK. Obviously it's gonna be different for everyone because you're all scheduled on different days. So let's say 5 o'clock, it's enough, so in the morning, um, you know, probably first thing in the morning, we'll look at your, the briefing notes for the, um, students who were scheduled that day, have a look through, get some ideas about what questions to ask, and, um, have that conversation. Hm Yes. Just 1, OK, so don't do weeks 345. Dependent on which week you choose to have your partner meeting, make sure you select the correct. Problem, alright, I'll try and make it as clear as possible in blackboard, yep. Yep, yeah, there are FAQs, thank you for that question. In Blackboard RADA has put together. If I accuse And one of those questions is exactly that you're allowed. To have a hard copy. So just print it out. Bring it along, you can refer to it, I mean there's none of this sort of I've gotta learn it off by heart type thing. It's a workplace situation, we're trying to make it as authentic as possible. If partner if partner's gonna ask you, OK, what what did you notice in this particular case, yes of course you can go back and look at that, yeah. Yeah, one page, yep. Yes, When are we locked into the time slot. As soon as you hit the button. But like right now I'm in a certain time slot that I can. You can, you can. Yeah Yeah, that, so you vacate that spot by when you select another spot, you're actually vacating that spot, someone may choose. So you obviously can only choose anything that's vacant. There's plenty of spaces left at the moment, so. Yep, yep, we're gonna have to close it off at some point and say this is the schedule, um. It's a really good question, so I think, I think we, I'll speak to RADA about this, but I think we're just gonna lock it in perhaps by the end of week 4, something like that and shut that down, otherwise, yeah, we don't want people moving around and confusing us. detailed Any indication of how detailed Uh, RDA is probably best to answer that. Um, I'm not content. Law content expert by any means, so um. Um, all I could say, it's a genuine sort of problem that a client has come along. And has got this problem, gotta try and solve. And you're gonna do the legwork for the partner to make some recommendations based on your research on what is the next step forward. Yes. Stuffing Is the briefing note able to be like annotated? I think so, yes. Yeah, no that's fine, yeah if you wanna highlight the key points, yeah that's that's perfectly fine. Yeah. Now the idea of the briefing note, it's highly recommended you do the briefing note because that is essentially your preparation for that meeting, right, the assessment is on the partner meeting, but if you don't do that background work, It could be a struggle. OK, so highly recommended that you do the work required for the briefing note. I mean since we've since we apply ourselves. With the briefing it Well, you're probably gonna get all sorts of different questions. I mean, you obviously can work on the problems together and obviously you come up with your original work, but I'd say each meeting there there could be different questions, so you don't know what the questions are. Yes. Certain. All I'm aware of is, from what R's told me is the referencing format, which is indicated there, the standard sort of format you use for law. Yes. Yes, the meetings are recorded, um as per UQ policy, OK, um, but I encourage you to, again, not look at it as an oral presentation, which is kinda like what I'm doing right now. It's, it's a conversation, it's about giving you practise in that type of scenario which is so important for the careers you're going into. Yes. like I didn't quite Get all of it, I heard the word professional a few times, like professionals. P Well, I think yeah, we're trying to simulate that so I mean um. Um, I It's, it's an informal conversation, keep in mind that you know if you're speaking to someone at work, you know, you're using, you're professional, um, so there's a tone there that you, you know, I think you would expect. Yep, OK. She's hiding in the corner there somewhere. Um, OK. Rada, welcome. We, we can't quite hear you. You're still there, Rada, we can't hear you at the moment. Sorry Rata, we can't hear you, so I'm not sure maybe if you wanna say something in the chat. OK. OK, RADA's saying have a look at the FAQs. There are quite a number of FAQs there, so hopefully um they answer any remaining questions. Of course, if you're still not clear on some parts, um please reach out to RADA um and she'll forward it to me and I'm very happy to answer your questions. OK, well I think. And she's just made a little note there, especially on substance, so I think you know what that means, so. Um I will leave it there and I will pass it to Ross and um looking forward to um. These partner meetings, right, thank you. OK. Oh right, PC PC yeah.

SPEAKER 1
You what God Close that up, you got your slides

SPEAKER 0
somewhere. There we go.

SPEAKER 1
I think that's gonna work. Thanks John. Yeah, I'll Around it. OK, thanks. Alright, thank you everyone. Thanks you for that, John, I much appreciated. All right. Um, Right. Hello everyone. Uh, I'm Ross Grantham. I'm just going to be doing the, what's left of the lecture today. Um, So how's the semester treating you so far? Yeah. All enthused about knowing more about company law. That's arguably one of the most important subjects you'll ever come across. Not that I'm biassed. It's also one of the only subjects that you'll study that uh gives you your own imaginary friend to play with. Do you know what I mean by that? The company. It's our imaginary friend. It exists for all sorts of purposes, but you can't see it, feel it, touch it. But it's immensely handy. In any other context, if you said that I have this imaginary friend that can do all of these wonderful things, um, they'd probably cart you off to an institution. But we're OK, we can talk about it like that because it's really useful if you wanna make money. And who doesn't want to make money? Anybody not want to make money? No, good, right. No communists here, right. Alright, um, I'm also the school's director of teaching and learning, so any complaints will come to me. Alright. I'm going to talk to you today about Corporate governance. And I just wanna put this in context for you so you know what we're gonna try and do today. I'm gonna offer you a, a lens through which you can look at everything else we'll do in the course. Alright. This is not what we're doing today. This is not about deciding actual cases or making particular rules or advising a particular client. This is more of a conceptual lens that offers you a view on everything that you'll be doing. It's a big picture Conception of what we're trying to do in this space. Now, corporate governance is used all over the place these days. Everybody talks about governance, everybody talks about corporate governance. And so you need to understand why they're using that term and what they mean by it, and what it's meant to do. But fundamentally it's a big picture. Way of analysing what's going on here, what is it we're actually trying to do? Alright, so when we, when regulators, when the, when parliament changes the law, adds new rules, What are they actually trying to do and why are they doing it? And how do we understand these additions, these changes? Alright. Think about it. The Corporations Act was enacted in 2001, and in the in the previous 25 years it has doubled in size. Oh. It's just a constant change, constant shuffling of ideas of addressing problems, fixing crises. And we'll touch on a bit more of that as we go through. Now if you have questions as we're going, please ask. Um, so if you have a question, everybody's got a similar question. And it's more than likely that I'm just not being clear, so please do shout out. The slides are no more than talking points. Um They're not detailed, you don't really need the detail of the information. This is an opportunity just to play with some bigger concepts and have a think about why we're here, what we're doing, what we're trying to achieve. Alright. Who has heard of the term corporate governance? Right. Few people read the AFR good. What do we mean by corporate governance? Well, despite its extensive use, it's still a highly contested concept and people mean different things uh by it when they use it. If we go back to, we know what corporate is, we know what corporate means, it's the company. What does governance bit mean? What does it mean when we put corporate and governance together? Well, Where does the word governance come from? Does anybody? Anybody really heavily into etymology? No, it comes originally from the Greek and it refers to steering of a ship. What does that tell us? Steering of a ship. Are we talking about the person who is holding the ship's wheel, the helmsman? Or are we talking about the captain of the ship who gives the orders and says we're going that way, not that way. These, these sorts of things play out in the in the debate in the corporate governance space. Are we talking about The strategy of the company, it's overall direction, or are we talking about much more operational things? About what the company does on a day to day basis, how it goes about its business. Now as we'll see it, it probably covers to some extent all of those things, although the emphasis tends to be on the bigger picture strategy direction. And increasingly culture. Now If, if you look at the corporate governance debate over the last 40 years odd, You can see sort of 3 strands of reasoning or or 3 developments that have, That have sort of emerged The first is, and, and actually I think these map onto um the disciplinary basis out of which corporate governance has emerged. So obviously lawyers are very concerned with corporate governance. And so, a lot of what corporate governance is about, is about rights, control rights. By control rights, I mean, who gets to control the company? Who gets to make the decisions about what the company does and how it does it. And a lot of what Company law is about, is about setting up a structure that allocates rights to different groups or interests. As you get further into the course, you'll realise that for most purposes, the management of the company, Decisions about what it does, what it makes, what it sells, and how it does it. Are made by the board of directors. And so a large part of the of the act, a large part of company law is concerned with allocating those sorts of decision making rights to the board of directors. But equally other rights are allocated to different groups. Some rights are allocated to shareholders. They tend to be of a particular kind. They tend to be about ultimate control. Things like changing the company's constitution. Uh, you'll cover that shortly. Who gets to change the company's constitution, that is its founding document? Well, those sorts of rights tend to be vested in shareholders. And then rights get vested sometimes in employees, sometimes in creditors, there are some external parties that have rights like auditors, regulators get certain control rights like the Australian Securities and Investment Commission, that's the corporate regulator. So you see a lot of corporate law is about this allocation of rights and decision-making powers. I've gone one too far, sorry. Another really strong theme you find in corporate governance is this idea of accountability. And in some respects that's the flip side. Of the allocation of these decision making rights. So yes, we give the board of directors the power to decide what the company is going to do. OK. But then we need some accountability on the part of the board for the decisions that it is taking. It's not an unfettered discretion. They can't do it, the board can't make decisions just for whatever reason. There is an accountability. And that accountability also has a slightly different aspect to it, and that's much more about the accounting. Uh The accounting profession has had a large finger in the development of the corporate governance pie. And of course they're very concerned about accounting. About managing the money, measuring where the money has gone. About questions of, has enough money been made? Could more money have been made? And so there is a very strong theme in company law as we'll see and corporate governance generally, about accounting. And that has some flow-on effects, as we'll see. Once you get to accounting, it's a very small step to start talking about the disclosure of accounting information. And so, if the lawyers are mainly concerned with the first one, it tend to have been the accountants that have driven the second one. And the third theme is, Perhaps unsurprisingly, but it's somewhat surprising that it's not as, not more dominant, is the idea of sort of efficiency or effectiveness. It's the idea that A well-run company is going to be more Efficient Than one that is not well run, not well managed. And so there is an aspect of corporate governance which is about just making companies work better. And if they work better, they are more profitable, and if they're more profitable, everybody is happy. On the assumption that money makes you happy. A lot of assumptions made through all of these debates. We'll try and touch on some of them, uh. So, we see these themes running through a lot of the corporate governance debate. So very simply we might say Control rights are concerned or or exemplified by the powers vested in the board to make decisions on behalf of the company. The accountability is manifested by then imposing restrictions on the directors as to what they can do or imposing fiduciary duties on the directors to make them accountable for the decisions they make. And the efficiency is, why do we vest the powers in the directors in the first place? Why do we pick them? Well, why don't we give the powers to run the company on a day to day basis to the shareholders or to the employees? One of the answers is that vesting it in a group of so-called expert managers. Is likely to produce the greatest efficiency, the greatest effectiveness for the company. That's how the theory goes. Alright. You with me so far? These sort of, these sort of areas then map loosely onto the primary sources of corporate governance regulation. Now you notice I talked there about regulation. Sometimes I'm talking about law, sometimes I'm talking about regulation. Anybody have an idea as to what the distinction is? Yeah Um, May not be. That's a, but that's an important point which we'll draw out. Regulation is arguably a bigger concept than law. So if we think about the circle of all mechanisms and rules and policies that are designed to affect behaviour or guide behaviour in society. That's regulation, it includes everything. Law is one mechanism for doing that. So if we want to, if we want as a policy objective, we want. Um We want people to uh pick up their dog poo and not leave it on the ground. There's a number of tools we have that we can go about to to bring about that policy goal. We could use a legal rule. It is an offence. Not to pick up your dog's poo. Penalty of one penalty unit. Or we can use other forms of regulation. Like a Um Um, what, what else could we use? We could. Have a system whereby, yeah, go on, forms of social pressure we yeah so we can back that up by doing what? Yeah, but how would we hold them accountable? Right. Good, and then how might, as a regulatory structure might we give effect to that? embarrassing people into, into compliance. Uh what action Yeah We might Call Yeah. Ross is a known dog. Yeah, that's me. Yeah, and how do we get that message out? So social media, yeah. Yeah, and how do we know? So this is, so what I'm doing to you is asking you the series of sort of questions that when you're trying to design a regulatory structure, you work through in your head. And so, OK, so that's, that sounds a plausible strategy. So the question is how do I, how are we gonna know when I don't pick up the poo. I mean, I suppose people Cease to Right, so, need to be observed, so we might have to set up a structure in which there is a reporting hotline. Or we could tap into CCTV which seems to be everywhere. We can use AI to sift out everything else and pick up just the people who leave their dog poop. And so we can have a, we can build a website. A national website where those who do not pick up, are posted and shamed. And so that becomes that becomes our regulatory solution. To the question of how do we get people to pick up their dog poop, we say right, social pressure is, is going to be effective, it might even be more effective than a fine. How do we bring the social pressure to bear, we design a structure in which there is observation and detection, publication, and then a means, For that social pressure to be brought to bear. None of that might involve any law. And we will see in corporate governance that a lot of the mechanisms of corporate governance that are designed to bring about accountability and efficiency are not legal rules. No. So If we think of the universe of corporate governance regulation. It is made up of at least 3 parts. It's made up of what's now referred to as hard law. Alright, Hard law is just law, it's proper law, it's a legislative provision or a binding decision of a court, common law, right? So there there is a lot of law law, alright, there's, the Corporations Act has probably 3700 sections. Substantive provisions. Ah, probably 800,000 words, right, so there's a lot of law law. Then there is what is referred to in the literature as soft law. And soft law is not law. Alright. Example of soft law would be the corporate governance best practise principles published by the Australian Securities Exchange. These are not law in the sense that, A failure to comply is unlawful. But they are nevertheless statements of best practise which through, A sort of corporate peer pressure. Everybody aspires to because this is a statement of best practise. And so, you start to get questions if you don't adhere to the ASX. Corporate governance code, they start to say, well, why haven't you done that? And when you go to your bank for a loan, the bank says, hm, you're not following best practise, we're not keen on lending to you. So it's the same with our Uh, dog poop, it's a form, almost a form of social pressure. And that's described as soft law. And then there are these things which sit in the middle of that and they're generally referred to as hybrids. A hybrid would be something which is Which has legal consequences but is not law in the sense that we generally understand it. Give you two examples, one is, The accounting standards. Uh, now, for those of you who are doing accounting, you know that accounting standards are made through this long process of international, and it's an international body which articulates accounting standards, which is then adopted by Australia and accountants as a matter of, Best practise and professional discipline are required to prepare accounts, consistent with Australian accounting standards. Right. These are all private bodies, professional body. But it's not just soft law, because The Corporations Act says you must prepare your accounts in accordance with Australian accounting standards. So it's a private body of rules which is given a legal which is given legal effect by legislation. So it's sort of halfway between. The other example is the ASX listing rules. So if you are a company and you wish to list yourself on the Australian Securities Exchange and have people trade in your shares, you have to abide by, The ASX's terms and conditions which are broadly known as the listing rules. And again, the act incorporates a lot of that. It says in various places, you must abide by the ASX listing rules. So again, they're a private set of rules, but they are given legal effect. And so when we think about corporate governance, we're thinking about hard law, soft law, and these sorts of hybrids. And we could also sort of throw in there to some extent. The practise of regulators. So ASIC is the primary regulator in the corporate space. It issues all sorts of guidance. Guidance, right? And so There is no, these aren't legislative rules, but they are a statement of ASIC's practise and what it wants to happen. And so, the corporate community will, Respond to that because you don't really want to get on the wrong side of the regulator. So all of these things are in this universe of Corporate governance. All right. Now, Two interesting. Asides. Oh sorry, I didn't press the button. Um So that's the hard or soft law stuff. Then we've got this question of company law versus corporate governance. Right As I said to you before, you can look at this in two completely different ways. You can say that the universe of corporate governance is the big universe and company law is one aspect of it, it is one tool. To achieve good corporate governance. But you can also see it as corporate governance being part of company law. In that company law is concerned with everything from the creation of the company. Right through to its death, which is in company terms is called liquidation or winding up. And it includes everything. It includes how you create the company, how you manage the company, the company's finances and capital structure. Shareholder remedies. Right through to winding up in insolvency. Corporate governance is only in that sense concerned with that bit in the middle, which is how you manage and run and control companies. It's not really concerned with how you create them, it's not really concerned with its capital structure. It's not really and it's definitely not concerned with its winding up in insolvency. So in that sense, corporate governance focuses on the interesting bit in the middle. Because trust me, once you get further on in the course and you come particularly to some of the capital stuff, it is mind-numbingly boring. Hm, because it's entirely rule-based, it's just you follow the rules. No, there's a whole lot of rules, you follow the rules, and that's it. And once you understand that, there's really not much else to understand, so it's not particularly intellectually exciting. Justiciability. Do you know what I mean by justiciability? Hm It's the capacity for, in this case, a court to meaningfully decide a matter. Well, now we broadly understand the role of the courts. They primarily are concerned with the determination of rights, duties and responses to. Um, things that go wrong. They, they examine facts, they identify rules, they apply rules to the facts to produce a decision in a case. When it comes to company law, courts are obviously very competent, they, That's what they spend their lives doing, determining rules, interpreting rules, applying rules. When it comes to things like the ASX corporate governance code. Or the ASX listing rules or any of these sort of softer types of law. There is a serious question about whether the courts have any role here at all. In one sense, corporate governance principles of the ASX are simply not justiciable, the court cannot rule on them because they are not a matter within the competence of the court. And if that's the case, then Potentially a lot of corporate governance is beyond the reach of the traditional courts. And that's an interesting development. Historically, everything to do with companies was considered by the courts. It was originally vested in the Chancery division of the English High Court, and in Australia it's vested in the Supreme Court. In New South Wales, which still has a separate equity division, it is vested primarily in the equity division of the New South Wales Supreme Court, as being the inheritor of the old Chally. But a lot of what happens in the corporate governance space, never goes to court because not something the courts can even consider. Insofar as the courts provide public accountability. For what companies do and what the people who run companies do, we are then taking away quite a bit of public accountability. Awful lot these days happens in boardrooms, behind closed doors, in discussions between the board and the shareholders, or the board and the regulator. You never hear about these things other than through the gossip mill. Uh, and what's published in the AFR and it's just an interesting way that this body of law has developed. Alright. Um, do you need a break? Yes. Desperately need a break, OK. Come back at one o'clock. I I I OK, it is one o'clock. So let us have a think about. What I've described there is the corporate governance question. It's, it's the big why question. What is it we're trying to achieve? Why are we concerned about Any of this sort of stuff. Ultimately we're asking what's the problem that we're trying to fix. Hm. So, let's go back a little bit. Let's go back to the early 1600s. No, we don't have to go back quite that far. But we can if we wanted to. One of the interesting things about, The sorts of problems that corporate governance responds to, is that they keep happening. There seems to be a cycle of boom bust, regulatory response. And then a period of calm before the next boom bust, regulatory response. It's a fascinating book by the economist, uh, JK Galbraith called. A Short History of Financial euphoria. And in that work, uh, Gal Braith highlights each of these financial regulatory governance crises and how they've been dealt with. And it starts with the tulip mania of the 1600s. Everybody started investing in tulips. Price of tulips goes through the roof. A lot of people make a lot of money. There's a, there's a boom, there's a big bubble created and then the bubble bursts. And then a lot of people lose a lot of money. And then regulators. Uh, try to fix the problem. That existed, so it doesn't happen again. It's gone. Unlikely, but has anybody come across references to the South Sea Bubble Company? You have. Oh, well done, OK. South Sea, speaking of bubbles, the South Sea Bubble Company. South Sea Bubble Company was a company originally set up in the late 1600s, early 1700s to restructure the entire debt of Great Britain, ultimately it had originally been set up to invest in South America, then it changed its business to buying up the whole national debt of Great Britain. Price of its shares spiked, as you do, um. By all accounts, there was a there was a large scale bribery and corruption. It was said that every member of the United Kingdom of Great Britain parliament at the time had been bribed. It's quite possible. Price spikes. The bubble bursts, it crashes. A lot of people lose an awful lot of money. Parliament's response. The English parliament's response was to ban companies. In the so-called bubble act. It's a really good name for a piece of legislation. The bubble act. And so companies were banned Now had had things remained as they were then, we would not be here. But of course, you know, life goes on and the need for a structure to conduct a business persisted, and so ways were found around it. No one was ever prosecuted under the bubble Act. And ways were found around it. Eventually a new form of entity arose, which is what we have today, the, the registered company, which was authorised in 1844. But what we see throughout history is this boom and bust. We have the Enron scandal, people familiar with the Enron scandal. Huge. Financial fraud. Just massive. Um And of course that blew up, crashed, vast amounts of regulatory response. In Australia it's known as CLLERP 9, the Corporate Law Economic Reform programme Act 9. In the United States, it was the Sabanes-Oxley legislation. Vast amounts of. They just, and we still got it, it's still all buried in the Corporations Act. And then we had various I think we had the GFC in the late 2000s, we had the Australian banking scandals which sort of linger on, um, And so this just get this cycle of boom and bust. Which ought to tell us that Some of the problems we're dealing with are really quite intractable. And it ought to Inform our expectations as to what we can do by way of good corporate governance. There are some problems that may simply be beyond our ability to control them. Let's move forward and we can move forward, um, to the sort of the beginning of the modern era. To The stock market crash of 1929. Alright, that was the one where you had all the stockbrokers leaping off tall buildings. Well Hm, haven't seen any of those films. At this time there were 2, there were 2 academics. Adolf Berlinggardner means one's a lawyer, Burl, the other was an economist. They were doing a large scale study of The corporate environment in the United States in the late 1920s, early 1930s. Of course it must have been tough to be known as Adolf in the 1930s, but. Um No, I didn't touch that. That's pretty cool. Alright. Um And they studied. The way that At least the big end of town, large corporations had developed. Over the preceding 40 or 50 years. And the thing that they noticed the most was. That large companies, and we would describe them as publicly listed companies, the sort of companies you find on various stock exchanges. They were now characterised by what they decided to call a separation of ownership and control. Now this separation means that those who are in control of the company, Don't own it. And those who do own it are not in control of it. Make that in more prosaic terms, what they mean is that the boards of directors who run companies, We're now largely free from oversight and constraint by the shareholders who, for present purposes we can say owns the company. And that was a function of the size of companies and the fact that individual shareholders own relatively small proportions of a company's total capital. Huh. Go back 50 years. The people who owned the company, who owned all the shares in the company were also the directors. Now we have a situation where you have a company might have 10,000, 20,000 shareholders, each holding very small percentages. Now that poses an obvious collective action problem. Alright, if nobody has a majority of shares and therefore can insist. On things. You have to get all of these small shareholders. To agree to some sort of collective action. Of course, getting people to agree. Getting a lot of people focused in the same direction is notoriously difficult. Plus, many of these shareholders were just not interested. In matters of governance. Yeah Now Most of us here will probably own shares in. ASX listed companies in one form or another. Whether it's through some sort of investment, whether it's through a super scheme, whatever, right. Let's say we own, um, we each own. $5000 worth of shares in BHP. Uh No. What do we want from our investment? Why have we invested in BHP? Yeah Right, for a monetary return. Can you get anything else in return? From your $5000 investment in BHP. I mean, you're not going, it's not going to parley itself into into employment. Right, with a lot of small companies, you know, people who own the shares are also the employees. You're not really gonna get a sense of um sort of self-satisfaction or self-fulfillment out of owning 5000 shares in BHP. So really the only thing you get out of your investment is a return on the investment, a financial return. Yeah Suppose there was, we heard through um Uh, the financial press that there were some difficulties with BHP. And I should stress for the purposes of the recording, none of this is meant to imply any financial instability in BHP. I don't wanna call from ASIC. Alright. So let's assume there is. What's your first reaction? Is it to mount a shareholder class action against BHP with the hope of getting a majority of shareholders to force a change in the way BHP? No, it's just not worth your effort, it's only 5000. So what do you do instead? Yeah, sell, sell, yeah. The Americans call that the Wall Street walk. If you don't like a company you're invested in, sell and move to another company. Alright, that's the simplest, most effective way of protecting your investment. It's also known as a diversified portfolio strategy. You don't put all your eggs in the one basket. The flip side of that is, because not all of your eggs are in the same basket, you don't really care about who's managing the basket anymore. Alright, you're not prepared to invest time and energy. In affecting a governance change because it's just not worth the interest that you have in the company. And so in the big picture, that means that none of the shareholders. Has any interest in trying to effectively monitor and provide oversight over what the board is doing. There is no accountability from the shareholders as they had historically been. And so those who are in control are effectively free from oversight and accountability. Those who control are no longer Controlled by those who own. And those who own no longer have any effective say in how the company is controlled. Berlaines identifies this as the governance problem. The fact that those who run large companies are beyond control. They described that as a governance gap, there is a gap in the governance structure. We have failed on our accountability. Element. There is no practical way of holding. Management of these large listed companies accountable for what they do. OK, with me so far? So what's the solution? Berlin Me's solution was subsequently labelled managerialism. And it's the idea that we should embrace. The freedom that corporate management has from shareholder oversight, to turn them into a technocratic, publicly minded group, who would do their best for society. Bill used to refer to these people as the princes of industry. And we could rely upon their technical expertise and their moral worth to do the right thing, not just to do what was profitable, but to do the right thing for society. OK, now Who thinks that sounds deeply naive? Yes. He does now. In the context of the 1930s, it's arguably less naive, alright, remember at that time, in that context, what we saw was, A sort of a failure of shareholder-led capitalism. Stock market had crashed, everything had gone wrong. We also saw in a geopolitical sense, we also saw the rise of fascist states in Europe, Italy and Germany in particular. And at that time they were doing incredibly well. They seemed to be getting society back on track, getting people united, and increasing the standard of living. Uh-huh. And so in that sense, Maybe it's not quite as naive if you look at it through that particular lens, but certainly it does sound a bit naive today. Nevertheless, The problem That Berlin means identified is still largely the corporate governance problem. How do we control the power and wealth that is contained in companies. How do we control those who exercise? The decision making powers of the company. How do we make them accountable, and to whom should we be making them accountable? Right. And we can sort of add to Berlin means question a slight refinement. So by the 1970s, um, There was a further reappraisal of, of the sort of the Berlin means analysis, and this was undertaken largely by financial economists, people like Eugene Farmer. Um, Michael Jensen and, um, various other people who were taking cosy and, Analysis and applying it to the company to try and work out A why companies form, and B, what's happening inside the black box of their management. This led to a, in a short order, led to a theoretical conception of a company called Agency theory. Now they're using agency in an economic sense rather than a strict legal sense, but it's still basically the same thing. And so they would recast the Berlin means problem is one of agency costs, that is, the people that you give the power to, The board of directors and the senior management. are likely to prefer their own self-interest. To the interests of the company and shareholders. Which is just a slight refinement on the Berlin means idea. And so in their terms, the function of corporate governance was to reduce as far as possible, The agency costs. The agency costs being the costs. Associated with the company being run by management in their own interests and not in the interests of shareholders. No. Those costs might take the form of. Um The board of directors of a company might decide to grow the company, Make it bigger, and they might decide to do that, not because that was the most efficient use of resources, but because, when they go to the golf club, they wanted to have the biggest company. Or the company might buy corporate jet. Not because it was the most efficient way to move senior executives around the country or around the world, but because the senior executives wanted a corporate jet. There's a smaller example. Uh So those are sort of agency costs we're concerned with where management are pursuing. Their own interests or their own conception of what those interests should be. As opposed to maximising. The interest of shareholders, which is still assumed to be a financial return. And so it's often said that the, the object of the company is to maximise shareholder wealth. The summary of that idea. And the agency costs are any activity which Diverges from the maximisation of shareholder wealth. It includes things like just not working very hard. In the jargon, it's called shirking. Huh? And so We're still left with this basic problem. As the governance problem, which is Those who control are not really accountable. And they are likely to prefer their own interests to those of the shareholders. And so the purpose of corporate governance is to provide solutions for that accountability. With me so far? Now, we see these solutions, some of these solutions in operation. We see it in, for example, fiduciary duties are imposed upon the directors. Section 181 of the Corporations Act, which reflects the common law, says the directors must exercise their powers in what they believe to be the best interests of the company. Whole lot of rules on conflicts of interest. Not allowed to make a secret profit, same sort of trust rules that are applied to directors. We see it in things like The transparency that is brought through. Mandatory financial reporting requirements. Huh. The directors have to cause accounts of the company's business to be made and those have to be made available to the shareholders and ultimately to the public through ASIC. The idea being that if you know what you're doing is about to be made public, you are less likely to do something naughty. We have general sort of disclosure regimes. For a similar purpose, we make the directors disclose what it is they're doing. In the hope that they'll be embarrassed. But we also have things like Executive remuneration, alright, that's a flash way of saying how much the directors and the senior executives get paid. Um Now, famously they all get paid vast sums of money. There's a question about the absolute amount, but the idea is that we can structure the way they are paid. To create incentives for them. To behave in the way that we want them to behave. So if we say to the directors, right, we will pay you. Based on the company's performance. So if the company's share price has gone up at this same time next year, then we will pay you a bonus. This relies on the director's self-interest, which we assume that they want to pursue. To cause them To prefer the interest of the company and to maximise shareholder value because that's the way they get paid. Yeah, it's just one example, uh, now. In a regulatory design sense. Yes, that's a good way, right, we pay directors based on performance. The more they perform, the more they get paid, therefore, the better they will perform. Of course it doesn't always work out that way. And so when sort of this sort of pay for performance and bonus based on various metrics about the company's performance first came in. It was found that the directors were quite cunning and could manipulate those. Metrics. So If the pay deal is that I get paid. A 50% bonus if in a year's time the company's share price has gone up by 10%. Then there are things that I can do to bump that share price up at that point in time without really improving the company's underlying performance. I could just before the relevant time, I could just lay off large numbers of employees, reduce costs. The market generally responds to a reduction of cost and therefore increase in profitability by bumping up the share price. Or I could defer a whole lot of expenditure that I would have incurred, the company would have incurred this year, but just push it back a few weeks into next year and therefore it doesn't appear on the books. The company looks a lot more profitable. Share price goes up, I get my bonus. In 3 weeks' time, those costs hit and the share price plummets. But I got my bonus. So There are ways of doing things. And there are Ways of avoiding the things that you're trying to do. And so there's a sense which is this ongoing sort of game of cat and mouse. You do one thing, you see how the market responds, you do something else. All right. Alright, now. You all good so far? So again, what we, what I'm trying to do here is to give you a way of thinking about a lot of the detail which you will look at later in the course. It's not something that would necessarily, ah, you will necessarily utilise in answering an exam on a fact problem, in fact, it's highly unlikely you will. But it gives you a perspective, a, a set of sort of intellectual tools to analyse what's going on, understand why it's happening. What, what are we trying to achieve here? Alright, so A few other other bits and pieces that flesh out this perspective. So we've discussed some of the mechanisms of regulation. Some of it will be law, some of it will be market mechanisms like we could. Encourage The corporate market, corporate environment to use more pay for performance for its senior executives. And indeed the corporate governance code does provide for that. Or we could Harness the disciplining effects of takeovers. Alright, takeover is is where one company buys all the shares of another company and takes it over. Alright. They can be consensual. Both parties agree so it's almost like a merger, or they can be hostile, which is where a raider comes along and says we're gonna buy that company. This can be harnessed as a disciplinary mechanism in this way. You're the directors of a company. And you're not particularly efficient. You just trundle along. The market will eventually price your shares quite low. Someone out there will say that company shares are really low, but it's assets are quite high, and with a different management that was more aggressive and more effective, its share price could be a lot higher. So, we're gonna buy that company. We'll throw out the management, put new management in, make the company more effective, and we'll make a big profit. The profit being what we paid for the shares when they were low, and the amount that the shares will climb to once we put in all of these reforms. That means that the incumbent board gets the boot. Right, Knowing that can act as a discipline on that incumbent board. I know there are raiders out there, so I better do more than the bare minimum, otherwise, I might be subject to a takeover bid by this raider and I'll lose my job. I don't want that, so I'll make the company a bit more profitable. And so that can operate as a market-based disciplinary mechanism to achieve some levels of accountability. So those are the sort of the mechanisms. One of the interesting questions, particularly about company law, is Is company law Intended to be a species of sort of mandatory. Controlled by the state or is it more enabling or facilitatory in what it's trying to do? Because ultimately what we're talking about here is that is. People Who want a business, they wanna do something, and they wanna do something together. On the one hand, you can say company law is about facilitating collective action. It's a very effective legal shell that allows a group of people to do something. To own assets, Enter into contracts, do all that sort of stuff, right, the corporate entity, the legal personality provides a good mechanism for facilitating that corporate action. And we see a lot of what is in the Corporations Act is clearly designed to facilitate that. Right. You, you will come across the idea of replaceable rules in the Corporations Act. This enables the people creating the company to tailor the company and the way it runs to suit their particular needs. I Creating a company is now dead easy. 5 minutes to fill in the form and a 400 and, $50 fee, and that's it. Why is it so easy? Because society and the state wants you to use that as your business vehicle. You know, we want to make you, we want to make it easy for you to get a company up because companies are very effective as a vehicle for conducting business. So a lot of the Corporations Act is clearly about facilitating. But there are also clearly parts of it that are mandatory in the sense that the state is saying, you must do this, you must not do that. And it's an interesting balance between the two. And that balance changes over time. After a major crisis, like the GFC, the rules that then get enacted tend to be very mandatory. And eventually they sort of weaken, they get watered down, and then we go back to a more, well, we need to improve the economy, we need to see growth in the economy. So we'd better make it a little bit easier. So just an interesting balance about what are we trying to achieve here. You know, are we trying to provide a very effective vehicle for the conduct of business? Or are we trying to protect society essentially from crooks and thieves? And there is a balance somewhere in the middle and that balance tends to change depending on your Political philosophy. So we have certain aspects of society which tend to be much more laissez-faire. It's all about business. Make business easy, cut red tape. And then we have groups in society that are much more concerned about the protection of society from the rape and pillage from the corporate sector. organisation of the law. Well I think this is interesting, you may not, but. I'm giving the lecture so I get to include it. How do we organise our corporate law, our corporate governance rules? And it's interesting to look around the world and see the differences. In Australia we have what we can describe as an omnibus statute, the Corporations Act. It includes everything vaguely associated with companies. It has the core stuff about how you create a company, how you manage a company, shareholder rights, capital, insolvency, well not not even an insolvency, take that up. That you would describe that as the core principles of the company, but then it's got a whole lot of other stuff. It's got all the stuff around secondary share trading, uh, financial licences. It's got all the insolvency stuff. And so the Australian approach is to say, If these, if the body of rules involves a company, then we'll stick it into the one piece of legislation. And so we end up with a very big piece of legislation. Contrast that with the likes of Australia and Canada. Their approach has been to have The core corporate statute only including the core corporate rules. So basically just the rules on creation, management, and rights and stuff. Insolvency is in a completely separate statute. All the stuff on financial markets is in a completely separate piece of legislation. Yeah, there's pros and cons. Huh? Interestingly, that in the common law world, Australia is the only jurisdiction that includes all of the insolvency stuff in the corporate statute. Everybody else has a separate piece of legislation which deals with insolvency for both companies and individuals, which is called bankruptcy. And so it's just a different sort of mindset about how you're approaching this. Huh? One interesting thing in Australia is that up until, I don't know, maybe 30 years ago. Government, the the responsibility in in government for corporate law, used to be with the Federal Attorney General. Right, then it got shifted to Federal Treasury. So you take it away from the lawyers and you give it to the business people. In a sense, that tells you something about how the company is seen by policymakers. Closely related to this idea of organisation. is audience To whom is the Corporations Act addressed? To whom is it speaking? Who does parliament expect to actually use it? Any ideas? Has anybody read the, yeah. Yeah, so innocent, so Corporations Act in many respects sets out for those in business, how the company is supposed to be run. But when you read the Corporations Act, And when you get it out and it's about this thick. How many company directors, particularly of smaller companies, are actually gonna say, hmm. Wonder what my obligations are here. I'll get the Corporations Act out. 0, yeah. Alright, it is not, and the way that it is written, it's manner and form, is that it is addressed to lawyers. And there is an assumption that that Everything is going to be mediated by professional advisors. So there isn't, doesn't seem to be a real intention that company directors ever have direct recourse to the Corporations Act, rather the assumption is that they will ask their lawyers. What it means and what they have to do. And that's, that is, that's a fairly traditional approach to the law. When you think about it, even going back hundreds of years, most of the law seems to have been written in lawyers' language for lawyers. And when you think about the common law, which is extracted from Case decisions The general public up until The boom of kind of open access online publishing, the general public simply did not have access to it. In contrast, again, Canada and New Zealand went out of their way to address their legislation directly too. Company directors. The in the Developmental work that led up to their legislation, they were very clear that this should be the first port of call for company directors. Language is simple, it's plain English. Um, what the New Zealand Companies Act says in 3 lines, the Corporations Act will take 10 pages. So there's a number of sort of implications that flow from that. If in Australia the reality is, company directors do not rely upon the actual test text of the Corporations Act, where are they getting their information about? What their obligations are from. Might get it from their advisors, but they might also get it from some of their software stuff. The ASX corporate governance code is Thin succinct document which gives you concrete examples, written in plain English. I think if you ask most company directors, even a, even a publicly listed companies, about what they know, most of it would be derived from those soft sources. And so in a sense though it is those soft sources rather than the law itself that is regulating the way directors behave. You know, I think it's just interesting. OK. Where are we today? Let me give you a few of my thoughts on where we are today in terms of the overall. Place of corporate governance and what's, what's happening. One Berlin means is still a fundamental question that most of corporate governance is concerned with. It's, How do we bring accountability to those who have moved beyond accountability? But It's been tweaked. It's been refined. We had the agency cost refinement, but it's been further refined. There's been more attention given to To whom should they be accountable? Historically it was very much your accountability meant maximising. Profits for shareholders. Increasingly we are seeing accountability expressed in terms of Accountability to society as a whole. We want more than just a good return, we want good behaviour, responsible behaviour. And so that's been particularly manifested in around the climate debate. And so you may see in some of the literature references to ESG, capital ESG. Which is a major concern. For corporate directors. ESG stands for Environmental, social and governance issues. And so increasingly, Boards are being held accountable for their Environmental position and actions. So we go back to BHP. BHP had a fairly unfortunate incident in Western Australia. That's forced the governance change within BHP. The public sentiment around companies which are, Irresponsible when it comes to the environment is manifesting itself in A slackening demand for their products. Nobody wants to invest in fossil fuels anymore. Well, at least until Trump came in, and everybody does again. Right, and so you sort of see that sort of social pressure being manifested in things like well we're just not gonna buy your products. There have been a number of major, Sort of consumer boycotts of various companies, particularly to those using palm oil. And they, it's that because they tend to clear virgin um rainforest and tropical forests to grow palm oil plants to generate oil, it's very destructive. And so there's been a lot of major consumer revolts against that which have forced change. 2. Increasingly we are seeing. The importance of corporate governance being justified on the basis of efficiency and productivity. We see various groups around the world much more focused on corporate governance aiding and assisting and facilitating productivity rather than just accountability. Huh. Ultimately, um, Companies are there to make money, to, Provide material well-being. For those in society. Accountability cannot be the only objective. If accountability kills that productivity, Then what's the point? Yes, we need accountability, but we need accountability that still, still allows the company to perform its core purpose, which is wealth generation. 3, We're seeing an even broader range of sort of regulatory mechanisms. There's there's a thing called or a theory called responsive regulation. This is this idea that we can build structures. That will bring those being regulated to the ultimate policy goals we have, Without having to be too heavy handed about it. So if you compare um a traditional legal rule which says thou shalt not kill. Hm And if you do kill, then you go to prison for a minimum sentence of life. It's very straightforward. Very directive. That has tended not to work so well in the corporate sphere because people find ways around things. So rather than doing that, we try to create regulatory structures which say you wanna kill, that's fine, but this is how you have to do it. You have to have a board resolution. You have to have a shareholder approval. You have to have it assessed by the regulator. And then providing all of this is done, then yeah, go ahead and do it. Oh Haven't actually done that for killing, but um, some cases not far off it. And so the regulation has become more sophisticated. But the consequence of the more sophistication is that it's a lot wordier. So thou shalt not kill. To express that in a responsive regulatory structure in the Corporations Act would, would take you tens of pages. Because you are trying to build a structure without just saying do this and if you don't, you'll be punished. We're trying to articulate a process by which people can achieve what they want to achieve. By following various processes and ticking various boxes. Right, last point. Australia. We identified Berlin means as globally the corporate governance question. But is it relevant for Australia? So the question goes like this, Berlin means developed their theory and it was refined by the various financial economists in the, in the 70s, around a corporate environment of big companies where you had large numbers of small individual shareholders. Now, that still describes in many respects, the US corporate landscape. Does it describe the Australian corporate landscape? When you look at the Australian corporate landscape, it doesn't look very much like the US. We have relatively few companies that have that hugely distributed, Small shareholding. Most of our companies have bigger shareholders. And that's partly because Australia is a, is a branch office of somewhere else. Yes, we had some genuinely big companies. Commonwealth Bank, BHP and they do look like the American, Bill and means type companies, but most of the companies on the stock exchange, once you get down out of the top 20. Tend to have bigger shareholders. They tend to have big investment banks, insurance funds, superannuation funds, holding substantial chunks. So Australia doesn't quite look like the Berlin means company around which the theory was developed. But I think Australia aspires to be like the United States, and so we've tended to treat ourselves as having. The Berlin means problem. But of course we're just put this in, in another context. In Australia there's 2 a bit million companies on the books. Of those Maybe 200 The ASX 200 are the large publicly listed companies. Everything else is small and closely held, that is, there are major shareholders. So 200 out of the 2 million just to make the numbers round. It's a very small percentage that we're basing our corporate governance regime on. We're solving a problem for the for very much the minority. What's the problem What's the governance problem in other companies? Governance problem in other companies, smaller companies, family-held companies is not so much that the directors are beyond accountability, it's that the shareholders fight. And so it tends to be a dispute between shareholders, not a dispute between shareholders and the board. It's a very different problem, but we tend to gloss over that because we're fixated on publicly listed company. Finally, that quote there is was my attempt at a comprehensive, Definition or conceptualization of what corporate governance is about. At least at the big end of town. You could. Take it, leave it, critique it. But it tries to get in their ideas around. Bill and means problem, the corporate governance question, tries to get in their ideas that we're talking about a whole range of regulatory mechanisms, not just the hard law. And that we are trying to institute accountability to address fundamentally, the Berlin means problem. OK. Any questions? OK, yeah. I Obviously Australia has Hm Uh, Mhm. Yeah, it's a really interesting question, so. One thing that I, that really characterises, um, company law derived from the UK, so the UK, Canada, Australia, New Zealand in particular, is that we have this one size fits all model, right. Corporation, the company created by the Corporations Act is the same. It doesn't matter whether you're a sole trader or whether you're BHP, it is the same corporate entity. All we've done is we've sort of tinkered around the edges. To reflect size. So small companies, proprietary companies are relieved of certain reporting obligations. Bigger companies have more reporting obligations. But fundamentally it's the same thing. And so in theory you could start up a business where you are the sole director shareholder, and if you are really successful, it will turn into BHP and it will remain the same corporate entity throughout. Other jurisdictions, particularly European jurisdictions, but also the United States, have gone on a different path and they have created different types of company for different purposes. You've heard about in the Americas they keep talking about LLCs, limited liability company. The irony is that when the Americans talk about limited liability company, they mean the exact opposite of what we mean by a limited liability company. Right, they're basically they're forms of partnerships with limited liability. But they've created these specific types of entity for specific purposes. The Europeans do it. You, you have to pick which sort of company you want. So in Germany for example, your small company has GMBH at the end. Your big companies have AG. And AG essentially means anonymous group. Which I think is quite an interesting, quite a telling expression for a publicly listed company. So yes, there's, there are many different ways of achieving. Sort of the same thing. Alright, so, again, I emphasise this is big picture stuff, it's a, it's a lens through which to think about a lot of the detail that you will be given. There is a vast amount of detail. And you can be very quickly overwhelmed by the detail and just see the detail and nothing else. But the purpose of this is to try and just Give you a basis upon which to think about what's really going on here? Why are we doing this? How are we doing it, what are we trying to achieve? Alright, well, I think we'd better leave it there. Thank you for your attention, hope you enjoy the course. How do I log off? Thank you. Yeah Sign out
