LAWS3701 Administrative Law

Workshop Five

Judicial Review Grounds II:

Procedural Ultra Vires and Other Forms of (Simple) Ultra Vires

Introduction: classifying judicial review

Judicial review, at its simplest, involves a court deciding if a particular ground of judicial review is made out in respect of government action (or, inaction). Judicial review is concerned with ensuring government decision-makers: (1) have the authority (jurisdiction) to take action; and, (2) that they stay within (express or implied) lawful limits and do not exceed their authority.

In a famous decision of the UK House of Lords – Council for Civil Service Unions and Minister for the Civil Service Lord Diplock characterised the grounds of judicial review in the following way: “Judicial review has I think developed to a stage today when …, one can conveniently classify under three heads the grounds upon which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review. The first [broad] ground I would call “illegality”, the second “irrationality” and the third “procedural impropriety”.”

Lord Diplock explained that illegality captured several discrete grounds of review that deal with the ambit (existence and scope) of public power – whether the law has been correctly understood and applied. Furthermore, irrationality related to what is known as ‘unreasonableness’ (based on a famous case called Associated Provincial Picture Houses v Wednesbury Corporation [1948]). Finally, procedural impropriety entailed “breach of natural justice” (or, procedural unfairness) and also a failure to act in accordance with statutory procedural rules or requirements (sometimes called procedural ultra vires). Similarly, in Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo, Kirby J stated that judicial review is designed fundamentally to uphold the lawfulness, fairness and reasonableness (rationality) of decision-making processes.

These taxonomies provide a helpful overview of judicial review grounds, but be mindful that there are many different, though overlapping, grounds of review. Consider the judicial review statutes that stipulate nine grounds of review over administrative action. One of those review grounds, ‘improper exercise of power’, is further sub-divided into nine discrete parts. In sum, eighteen grounds of judicial review are codified in the JR statutes (federal and state (Queensland)). Don’t worry, we won’t be studying each and every ground in depth in this course, only those most frequently raised in judicial review proceedings.

As we discussed in the second workshop, an aspect of the rule of law and a foundational principle of administrative law, is that the actions of government decision-makers must be founded upon a legal authority: statute, common law, or non-statutory executive power under the Constitution [the latter informed by the prerogative powers of the Crown]. As Lord Roskill stated in the House of Lords in CCSU v Minister for the Civil Service:

… the right of the executive to do a lawful act affecting the rights of the citizen, whether adversely or beneficially, is founded on the giving to the executive of a power enabling it to do that … . In most cases that power is derived from statute though in some cases … it may still be derived from the prerogative.

How does statutory interpretation link to administrative law?

Statutory interpretation is a key aspect of judicial review in circumstances where the source of public power is legislative – as opposed to the common law or constitutional (s 61 – executive power of the Commonwealth). Accordingly, for the courts, administrative law is often an exercise in statutory interpretation. It is through a process of statutory interpretation that the courts review and determine the ambit of statutory powers, including whether officials have the power (jurisdiction) to act, or if officials have exceeded the limits on their statutory powers. Statutory interpretation is also relevant when the courts have to determine whether statutory powers were fairly or properly exercised. Also, statutory interpretation is relevant when the courts have to ascertain what the consequences of illegality are; what follows when there is non-compliance with statutory requirements? That question invites consideration of the leading case of Project Blue Sky (see below).

Courts take into account interpretative factors derived from a consideration of four main sources: (i) the legislative provision in question; (ii) the Act in which the provision is sourced; (iii) the legislative history of the Bill which became the Act; and (iv) the wider context. The courts have the prime authority to interpret and declare the law with finality and enforce it (recall A-G (NSW) v Quin (1990) - workshop two). However, the other branches of government are in a position to inform judicial interpretation (via extrinsic material relating to the legislative history (e.g. Hansard)), notwithstanding that the separation of powers under the Constitution provides for the judiciary to supply authoritative determinations about the meaning of statutory provisions.

So, statutory interpretation links to administrative law because the courts may be asking (among other questions):

“Who is the lawful repository (recipient) of statutory power?”

“For what reason or purpose was the statutory power conferred?”

“What are the ‘relevant considerations’ express or implied from the statutory provisions, that a decision-maker must pay due regard to before taking lawful action?”

“What is the standard of reasonableness indicated by the true construction of the statute?”

Or, “does the statute clearly displace (or modify) natural justice (fair hearing) principles?”

When the courts are asked to review the exercise of administrative power the starting point is paying close attention to the terms of the statute conferring power on the Executive branch. This brings into play important principles (or canons) of statutory construction (including the ‘principle of legality’).

Determining the ambit (existence and scope) of statutory powers

We examined the absence of a ‘fair hearing’ as a ground of review in workshop four which is one critical aspect of procedural fairness (or, natural justice). Now we will examine other instances in which government decision-makers may contravene the law because they make errors about the existence and/or scope of their public powers.

The grounds of judicial review are enshrined in federal and state judicial review legislation. The ADJR Act 1977 (Cth) s 5(1)(b)-(d) & s 6(1)(b)-(d) codify what are sometimes termed ‘simple’ forms of ultra vires; meaning reasonably simple species of illegality where: (i) statutory procedures have not been followed, or (ii) where decision-making is unauthorised because the approved person or body has not exercised the power (unlawful delegation), or (iii) because the approved person or body has exercised the power but misconceived the nature and limits of their powers.

Procedural ultra vires

As Lord Diplock stated in CCSU, one aspect of procedural impropriety is where executive decision-makers fail to follow procedures required by law. Now, this ground of review is found in s 5(1)(b) & 6(1)(b) of the ADJR Act 1977, and it is also recognised at common law. The realm of environmental and planning law provides a neat illustration of how procedural issues can arise.

Environmental planning laws in Australia provide for public participation processes in proposed developments. As the courts have acknowledged, “… public participation in the development approval process is important if the best possible ecologically sustainable development outcomes are to be achieved.” This principle is recognised internationally in the Rio Declaration, adopted at the UN Conference on Environment and Development (1992). Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration provides:

Environmental issues are best handled with participation of all concerned citizens, at the relevant level. At the national level, each individual shall have appropriate access to information concerning the environment that is held by public authorities, including information on hazardous materials and activities in their communities, and the opportunity to participate in decision-making processes. States shall facilitate and encourage public awareness and participation by making information widely available. Effective access to judicial and administrative proceedings, including redress and remedy, shall be provided.

And in the Rio+20 Declaration, adopted at the World Congress on Justice, Governance and Law for Environmental Sustainability (2012), the importance of fair, effective and transparent national governance arrangements and rule of law was highlighted. These international principles are reflected in the objects of certain environmental and planning legislation in Australia, for instance the Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979 (NSW). The statutory objectives are given teeth by public notification provisions that “facilitate access to environmental justice”. Briscoe J characterised the relevant notification provisions in the EPA Act 1979 (NSW) in this way:

Section 79A(2) of the EPA Act provides for a most important part of the public participation process, that of public notification or advertisement. It not only gives force to the statutory objects, it gives statutory force to the common law obligation to afford procedural fairness in the exercise of public power, a breach of which may be jurisdictional error.

So, statutory (procedural) provisions like s 79A(2) EPA Act provide an opportunity for those who have an interest in, or may be affected by, a proposed development, to learn the details before a planning consent decision is made. It also improves the quality of planning decisions by enabling the planning authority to make a fully informed decision, mindful of the potential consequences as perceived by the local community.

Accordingly, compliance with statutory procedures is an important condition precedent (a ‘pre-condition’) to the exercise of power to determine a planning application. If the beneficial effect of public notification is defeated by inaccurate or incomplete information in it, the notification will be misleading and so invalid. But what is the legal consequence if there is only a trivial or minor departure from statutory procedural requirements?

Let us say that the legislative planning requirements stipulate that: (1) the address of the proposed development site must be notified to the regional planning board and to affected members of the public (those with adjoining property) and (2) the proposed Lot Number and House Number of the proposed development site must also be specified to planners and the public. Let us assume the proposed re-development of an old (disused) police station is to occur in a coastal town, and the development site looks like this:

Pearl St

Marine Drive

Assume that the development application expressed the address of the site as ‘the old police station’, 150-154 Marine Drive, Kingscliff, (Lot 70), but in the notification letters sent out to adjoining property owners and residents the address is detailed as, ‘the old police station’, Pearl St, Kingscliff (Lot 70). The Local Council’s rating records list the property address as Pearl Street, whereas telephone records (‘White Pages’) list the address as Marine Drive, and a Google search details the old police station as at 154 Marine Parade.

If planning consent was granted and, subsequently, an adjoining land owner sought judicial review on the basis that the notification letters were defective, because the listed address (Pearl St) was wrong, would the failure to follow planning procedures invalidate the substantive planning decision (rendering it void ab initio)? The point of contention would be that the development application listed the site as Marine Parade, but the notification letter gave the street address as Pearl St.

In older cases, the approach of the courts to the situation described above was to ask whether the procedural requirement was mandatory or directory.  Mandatory requirements needed strict compliance, whereas, for directory requirements, the question was often whether there had been ‘substantial compliance’ with the ‘directory’ (procedural) requirement. By contrast, the contemporary approach is reflected in the judgment of the High Court in the case of Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority. The High Court decided that an act done in beach of a condition regulating the exercise of a statutory power was not necessarily invalid. Rather, it turned on statutory interpretation: ascertaining what the legislature had intended would occur in circumstances where a procedural error was made.

So, whether an exercise of power was treated as legally invalid (void ab initio) depends on whether it was a purpose of the legislation to invalidate any act done in breach of a (procedural) condition stipulated in legislation. The nature of the statutory purpose is ascertained by reference to the language of the statute, its subject matter and objects, and the consequences for the parties of holding void every act done in breach of the condition. In Project Blue Sky the High Court abandoned its earlier references to ‘mandatory’ conditions as contrasted with merely ‘directory’ procedural conditions and also abandoned asking related questions about whether or not there had been ‘substantial compliance’ with the procedural condition (or otherwise). Instead, the Court stated that: “A better test for determining the issue of validity is to ask whether it was a purpose of the legislation that an act done in breach of the provision should be invalid.”

Adopting and applying the High Court’s approach in Project Blue Sky to the planning problem outlined above would entail a court asking whether listing Pearl St as the relevant address in the public notification letters (which was different from the address listed in the development application) was inaccurate and misleading and, therefore, defeated the purpose of the public notification requirements; conditions that were a pre-requisite of the proper exercise of planning laws.

On the basis of the problem postulated above we know that the notification letter contained details of the correct Lot No, and that there was a reference to Pearl St which was consistent with Council ratings records, and Pearl St was at the western boundary of the old police station site. We might also add a police station has a special identity that would be known to local residents.

Consequently, even if it was accepted that the incorrect address was supplied in the public notification letters, there was still sufficient information in the notification letter (e.g. correct Lot Number and reference to ‘old police station’) so that recipients of the letter could readily identify the address of the proposed development site – and that was the purpose of the notification procedures. It would follow that the procedural failing in this instance would not likely invalidate the planning consent decision: i.e. the failure to comply with procedural requirements would not render the action taken void ab initio.

Failure to comply with procedural requirements – procedural justice requirements operating to impinge on and defeat Aboriginal People’s interests?

A related problem to the one canvassed above arose in the controversial case of Tickner v Chapman, an important and politically controversial case that concerned the protection of Aboriginal heritage. The case is part of what has become known as the ‘Hindmarsh Island Bridge Affair’. The case stemmed from an application raised by members of the Ngarrindjeri Nation who had resorted to the law to obtain a judicial ‘declaration’ to prevent construction of a road bridge in South Australia on the basis it was destructive of their ancient sites and spiritual beliefs. The background to Tickner v Chapman (and the surrounding case-law and inquiries) is explained in Ch 7 Rights and Redemption (‘From Kumarangk to Hindmarsh Island’) 167-173. This chapter is accessible as a pdf via Learn.UQ; please read it before proceeding at this point.

Historical and social context: The Ngarrindjeri are among many discrete Aboriginal communities who traditionally inhabited the areas around Murrundi (known alternatively as Echuca or Millewa). Jenkin’s anthropological account of the Ngarrindjeri – of their early contact with Europeans and the Ngarrindjeri’s response to invasion – records that they owned a great triangle of land, some of it rich and fertile, all of it beautiful and not far from substantial stretches of water.

The British Parliament passed the South Australia Act 1834 (UK) (‘Founding Act’) without prior consultation with the local Aboriginals or notification. The Founding Act contained no reference to the Ngarrindjeri or other Aboriginal communities. No attempt was made by the British to notify the Aboriginals that the land was no longer theirs to occupy and enjoy, nor that their ancient legal systems no longer applied. The Founding Act sanctioned colonization and triggered the dispossession of the Aboriginal tribes – whose land was anything but “waste and unoccupied” as the Act’s Preamble falsely proclaimed – rendering them alien in their own land.

The first official colonists, arriving in South Australia from 1836 onwards, were informed by the British Government that there was land for lease or sale, and in accordance with those laws paid for property and acquired tracts of Ngarrindjeri land. By 1840 Kumarangk had been leased to Europeans for agricultural and pastoral purposes. The advancing European frontier and disease spread by the Europeans resulted in the decline of the Indigenous population. By 1860, the Select Committee of the Legislative Council upon the Aborigines (SA) admitted that those Aboriginals that had survived the occupation had lost almost everything and gained practically nothing by their contact with Europeans. Some Ngarrindjeri remained on Kumarangk until 1910 when they were forcibly moved onto a Mission at Raukkan (previously, ‘Port McLeay’). The dominant legal system supported the regulation of their segregated lives on the Mission. By the Aborigines Act 1911 (SA) it sustained the extensive powers of the chief protector to restrict or coerce movement and institutionalise children. The dislocation from traditional landscapes and family break-up impacted on the traditional knowledge retained by the Ngarrindjeri and its transmission to others.

Chief Justice Black of the Federal Court reflected on Europeans’ negligence of Aboriginal heritage in the case of Tickner v Bropho, observing: ‘the significance of areas and objects of profound cultural and spiritual significance to Aboriginals was simply not appreciated’ and even when there was such an appreciation the interests of the settlers prevailed, ‘without any proper or informed consideration of the interests of Aboriginals’.

It is against this historical backdrop that attention turns to the case of Tickner v Chapman: the purpose and nature of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act 1985 (Cth) (‘HPA’), and the question of procedural ultra vires. Simply put, what is the suitable content of procedural stipulations in statute when culturally sensitive information is relevant to administrative decision-making procedures? What constitutes appropriate ‘public notice’ and ‘disclosure’ when there are confidentiality considerations in play that are important to Aboriginal people and their culture?

The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act 1985 (Cth)

The HPA’s purpose was to safeguard what remains of Aboriginal cultural heritage and remedy social injustice and disadvantage. In parliamentary debates, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs acknowledged the socio-historical context for the legislation. Citing the Tasmanian Dams case he quoted Murphy J, who stated that since European settlement Aboriginal people of Australia “have been the subject of unprovoked aggression, conquest, pillage, rape, brutalization, attempted genocide and systematic and unsystematic destruction of their culture.” The HPA is directed to the preservation and protection of areas and objects in Australia and in Australian waters that are of particular historical, cultural or spiritual significance to Aboriginals in accordance with Aboriginal tradition.

The legislative scheme of the HPA entails a two-step, deliberative, decision-making process. The first step involves a statutory notice and public invitation to interested persons to furnish written representations about the heritage application to a nominated reporter, who then collates, considers, and evaluates the representations and issues a report, dealing with specific matters about the application, to the Minister.  Accordingly, s 10(3) HPA reflects aspects of the common law’s ‘natural justice’ rules (recall workshop four) by imposing prior notice requirements on the nominated reporter. Additionally, the legislative requirement to invite submissions from the public, in response to a heritage application, is commensurate with the common law principle that people whose rights and interests are apt to be affected by government decision-making have a reasonable opportunity to be heard.

The second step requires consideration of the report and the Minister is permitted to make a declaration in relation to a “specified area” preventing prescribed activities in respect of land if s/he is “satisfied” both that the area is a “significant Aboriginal area”, and that it is “under the threat of injury or desecration”. The question whether a declaration should be made is of a political character, informed by public representations and a report in relation to the area, and with consideration of other matters the Minister deems relevant.  The matters to be dealt with in the report are set out in s 10(4) which makes several references to “the area” that is of particular significance to Aboriginals, that is under threat and which should be protected.

So, in summary, a precondition to the valid exercise of the declaratory power under the HPA is that the Minister must receive and consider a report from a nominated person. An essential part of the reporting process is that a notice must be published in the Gazette, and in a local newspaper (if any) “stating the purpose of the application made under subsection 1 [of s 10 HPA] and the matters to be dealt with in the report”.

The Heritage Protection Application and Legal Challenge: An application was made under the Heritage Protection Act 1985 (Cth) for the permanent protection of land of significance to the Ngarrindjeri people. The building of the bridge between the town of Goolwa and Kumarangk (‘Hindmarsh Island’) was said to be culturally destructive for the Ngarrindjeri’s connection to country. Among several hundred submissions made to the official Reporter (Professor Cheryl Saunders), a group of Ngarrindjeri women Elders alleged the site was sacred to them and made confidential submissions (about their folklore) to the Reporter. (This information became known in the media as ‘secret women’s business).

Two days after the report was submitted the Minister made a declaration in respect of land at the mouth of the Murray River, prohibiting the construction of a bridge to Kumarangk.

Proponents of the bridge development (the Chapmans) who had significant proprietary (business) interests on Kumarangk instituted judicial review on the basis that the process for making the declaration was legally flawed in critical respects – that it did not comply with statutory stipulations – with the consequence (it was argued) that the declaration was invalid.

The HPA’s procedural – notice – provisions offered little substantial guidance on the mode or degree of disclosure required in the public advertisements. Accordingly, what constituted sufficient notice in this context was implied by the Federal Court via a process of statutory construction, with reference to the legislative purposes, the shape of the administrative scheme, and administrative law principles and values.

The Full Court of the FCA affirmed the decision of the trial judge (Loughlin J) and held that the public notice issued under s 10(3) was defective. Therefore, due to the procedural failing (giving sufficient notice), the Minister’s declaration was invalidated.

By way of concluding our discussion of Tickner v Chapman be aware that the Court also considered the Chapman’s additional legal claim that the Minister had failed in his statutory duty to consider relevant material, because he had not personally read the confidential (sacred) information submitted by the female elders (the so-called ‘secret women’s business’) – representations that were appended to the written report authored by the official Reporter (Prof Saunders). Instead, Tickner had relied upon the female Reporter’s account and assessment, and also a female staffer’s summary of the secret material which she conveyed to him.

No jurisdiction to take action: Improper delegation of statutory powers

The legality of a decision can turn on whether the lawfully nominated official, under statute, has in fact made the decision. Who is legally responsible, and therefore accountable, for decision-making must be established. Executive government decision-makers can fall into error by claiming and administering a power that is not theirs to exercise; that is, they purport to make a decision that they lacked jurisdiction (or authority) to make. This constitutes an error under s 5(1)(c) or s 6(1)(c) ADJR Act 1977 (the person who purported to make the decision did not have jurisdiction to make the decision), and at common law this can be referred to as an unlawful (or impermissible) delegation of power.

This ground for review can be clearly linked to the rule of law because under the law government officials and ordinary members of the public are treated alike, and each must point to a legal authority that permits them to interfere with other people’s rights and interests. So, a statute that enables person X to make an order depriving a person of their freedom of movement does not permit person Y to interfere with that fundamental freedom.

These sorts of situations can arise where public powers are dispersed under a statute that governs a high-volume administrative decision-making field (like tax administration – consider roughly how many taxpayers there are in Australia).  O‘Reilly v Commissioner of the State Bank of Victoria is one of the leading cases on improper (unlawful) delegation and it is concerned with the practical necessity and legality of ‘agents’ exercising powers on behalf of a principal statutory decision-maker (or their delegate).

In O’Reilly’s case the Commissioner of Taxation was authorised to issue notices under s 264 Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (Cth), in addition to which (pursuant to the express terms of s 8) authorised delegates (Deputy Commissioners) could also exercise functions under the Act and issue notices. The Deputy Commissioner had no express statutory power of sub-delegation, nevertheless the Deputy Commissioner supplied written authorisation for another official (Chief Investigation Officer (‘CIO’)) in the Australian Taxation Office (‘ATO’) to issue notices to taxpayers which bore the signature of the Deputy Commissioner.

The question for the High Court was whether this was a lawful (authorised) exercise of statutory power, or whether they had been an ‘unlawful delegation’ of power to the CIO.

The High Court held that the CIO had been acting as the agent of the Deputy Commissioner and so exercise of the statutory power to issue notices was lawful. Gibbs CJ (who gave the leading judgment) had to weigh up the importance of the power to issue notices on the one hand, with the practical demands of decision-making in a very large and busy government department (ATO) on the other. Drawing on an older British case – Carltona Ltd v Commissioner of Works – Gibbs CJ stated:

I can see no reason why, in construing sections of the Act which confer powers on the Commissioner, it should not be proper to consider the undoubted fact that the Commissioner could not possibly exercise all those powers personally. Section 264 confers on the Commissioner a power whose exercise will be likely adversely to affect rights of individuals. This is a reason for inclining in favour of the view that it must be exercised personally. On the other hand, that section, and a number of other sections of the Act, confer on the Commissioner powers which may be expected to be exercised in myriads of cases. …

Since there are literally millions of taxpayers … it would reduce the administration of the taxation laws to chaos if the powers conferred by those sections could be exercised only by the Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner personally. It cannot be supposed that the Parliament intended such a result. …

… [I]t seems to me that there exists, as the Parliament must have known, a practical necessity that the powers conferred on the Commissioner by the Act should be exercised by the officers of his Department who were acting as his authorized agents. On the whole I have reached the conclusion that the powers conferred by s. 264 were not intended to be exercised only by the Commissioner or his delegate personally but may be exercised through a properly authorized officer.

So here then, a clear emphasis placed upon statutory intention to support the view that practical administrative necessity meant the powers in question could be exercised by an ‘agent’ who was duly authorised to act in writing. This was so notwithstanding there were express delegations of the Commissioner’s authority under the statute, and this additional (implied) authorisation fell outside of the express statutory delegations of power.

Unauthorised decisions

Government action may also be beyond power at common law and contrary to s 5 (1)(d) and s 6(1)(d) ADJR Act 1977 because the decision-maker purports to make a decision that they were not authorised to make; they may misconceive the scope and extent of their powers. A classic illustration of this ground of review is Swan Hill v Bradbury, where the High Court had to consider the extent of a power to make by-laws (a form of delegated legislation).

The HCA held that a statute – the Local Government Act 1915 –authorised the local shire (through by-laws) to ‘regulate’ and ‘restrain’ the erection and construction of buildings, but this power did not extend to enable the local shire to prohibit the erection of buildings unless with the approval of the municipality. Rich J stated that

No one would suppose that it was intended by the legislature to allow a municipality to suppress all building except that which in its uncontrolled discretion it should think fit to allow in individual cases. If ... it appeared wise to the legislature to entrust municipalities with so large a power it would not be done by the vague conjunction of the words ‘regulating and restraining’.

So, the power to ‘restrain’ was more restricted than a power to ‘prohibit’, and the specific clause in the by-law purporting to restrain the erection of building was beyond power and, therefore, an invalid exercise of power by the local shire.

Another example of a decision-maker acting without the requisite power (i.e. ‘unauthorised’) is the case of Goldie v Commonwealth. This case is important because it illustrates how statutory provisions can make the exercise of power conditional upon a decision-maker attaining a particular state of mind as a prerequisite of the lawful exercise of power; such as, “if the decision maker reasonably believes” or “where the decision-maker forms the opinion that” or “where the decision-maker is reasonably satisfied”. All these expressions express a common notion – that decision-makers cannot lawfully exercise power until the requisite state of ‘belief’, ‘opinion’ or ‘satisfaction’ is attained. Decisions can be characterised as ‘unauthorised’ when the decision-maker has failed to reach the required state of mind.

In Goldie an immigration officer purported to detain a person because they knew or reasonably suspected that the person was an unlawful non-citizen. So here the question was whether the administrative official had lawfully exercised the statutory powers of arrest and detention; or was the decision to arrest and detain unauthorised, meaning Goldie was falsely apprehended and imprisoned?

Gray and Lee JJ held that an immigration officer who claims to form a reasonable suspicion that a person is an unlawful non-citizen, and who then detains that person, ostensibly acting under s 189 Migration Act, must obtain material likely to be relevant to the formation of that suspicion (or belief). On the facts the officer had relied on an incorrect and dated computer record and had ignored contrary file information held about Goldie, so the Court held that the officer’s suspicion was not reasonably held. The officer had failed to make sufficient inquiries to make the suspicion justifiable rendering the arrest and ensuing detention unauthorised and unlawful. Gray and Lee JJ stated:

Plainly, to empower an arrest on the basis of an irrational suspicion would offend the principle of the importance of individual liberty underlying the common law. It would also allow the possibility of arbitrary arrest, with the consequence that Australia would be in breach of its international obligations pursuant to Art 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966… . To avoid these consequences, the word "reasonably" has been placed before the word "suspects" in s 189(1). The adverb makes it clear that, in order to justify arrest and detention, the suspicion that a person is an unlawful non-citizen must be justifiable upon objective examination of relevant material. Given that deprivation of liberty is at stake, such material will include that which is discoverable by efforts of search and inquiry that are reasonable in the circumstances. …

The context of the phrase "reasonably suspects" suggests that something substantially less than certainty is required. Reasonable suspicion, therefore, lies somewhere on a spectrum between certainty and irrationality. The need to ensure that arrest is not arbitrary suggests that the requirement for a reasonable suspicion should be placed on that spectrum not too close to irrationality.  …

It is worth remembering, however, that all of the circumstances must be considered. If, as in the present case, an officer is aware of conflicting facts, the reasonableness of any suspicion formed by that officer must be judged in the light of the facts available to him or her at the particular time. It may be that the existence of a particular fact would ground a reasonable suspicion in the mind of the officer if it were the only fact known to him or her. If, at the time of forming the suspicion, the officer is aware of conflicting facts, it may not be reasonable simply to discard those facts and to form a suspicion on the basis of the single fact capable of supporting such a suspicion. That is, the officer is not empowered to act on a suspicion reasonably formed that a person may be an unlawful non-citizen. The officer is to detain a person whom the officer reasonably suspects is an unlawful non-citizen. That, of course, is consonant with the serious act the officer is empowered to carry out.

In summary, the Court held that the statutory power did not legally support the arrest and detention of Goldie because the immigration officer did not have the requisite state of mind (formation of a reasonable suspicion) prior to acting.

There have been several notable decisions of the Federal Court in the recent past regarding the ‘detainer’s state of mind’, that is, the reasonableness of suspicions held by immigration officials regarding a person’s status as an ‘unlawful non-citizen’. These matters have arisen following the precedent set by the HCA in Love v Commonwealth (2020).

In that case the High Court held, by a majority, that Aboriginal persons were not within the reach of the ‘aliens’ power under s 51(xix) of the Constitution and therefore not subjects of the Migration Act (which is founded upon the aliens’ power).  The majority held that Aboriginal Australians (born overseas), understood according to the tripartite test in Mabo v Queensland [No 2] (1992) are not within the reach of Parliament’s power to make laws with respect to “aliens” pursuant to s 51(xix) of the Constitution. Therefore, they cannot be the subject of administrative detention and deportation laws under the Migration Act 1958 (Cth). Essentially the HCA decided that given Aboriginal people had inhabited Australia for 40,000 years and possess a unique spiritual connection to Australian land and waters they cannot meet the description of an ‘alien’ in the ordinary sense of the word (‘not belonging’). Aboriginal Australians (born overseas) are, in short, “non-alien non-citizens”.

It follows that immigration officials now have to be vigilant when detaining non-citizens who are or may be of Aboriginal biological descent or accepted members of Aboriginal groups. If there is information before officials regarding a person’s potential Aboriginality, then it may not be ‘reasonable’ for them to ‘suspect’ a person is a proper subject of administrative detention.

See Montgomery v Minister for Immigration, where it was accepted that Montgomery was not an Australian citizen (he was born in NZ), however he had been adopted by the Mununjali People and they recognised him as part of their people. Therefore, it could be strongly argued he was Aboriginal according to traditional law and custom. SC Derrington J determined:

It was accepted by the Minister that he both identifies as an Aboriginal Australian and has been accepted by a traditional Aboriginal group as a member of that group. In these circumstances, the suspicion held by the relevant officer that Mr Montgomery is not an Aboriginal Australian is not reasonable. … The Minister has failed to discharge the onus of proof that an officer held the reasonable suspicion that Mr Montgomery is an alien by not being an Aboriginal Australian.

Accordingly, Montgomery was entitled to the issue of a writ of habeas corpus and an order that he be released from detention forthwith.

Unauthorised decision: ‘jurisdictional facts’

Ordinarily, questions of fact are not subject to judicial review because they are matters for the executive branch during original decision-making or upon review or appeal before an administrative tribunal. An important exception to this rule relates to facts known as “jurisdictional facts”.

Jurisdictional facts are essential preconditions that must be established before an official can lawfully take administrative action. For example, before the Minister can order the deportation or removal of a person (under the Migration Act 1958), they must first be sure they are actually ‘aliens’ – that is a jurisdictional fact issue. If a person is a citizen (or an Aboriginal Australian born overseas but resident in Australia), they are not an ‘alien’ for constitutional purposes and therefore not susceptible to the deportation/removal powers under the Migration Act and the Minister lacks the jurisdiction to expel them.

Equally, before an immigration officer can lawfully subject a person to administrative (immigration) detention, the officer must ‘reasonably suspect’ that person is an ‘unlawful non-citizen’ that is to say someone lacking a valid visa to enter and remain in Australia. In circumstances where jurisdictional facts do not exist or are not satisfied, a person purporting to act has no jurisdiction or authority to do so.

One of the leading cases dealing with the meaning and application of jurisdictional facts is known as the Malaysian Declaration Case: Plaintiff M70 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship. The case arose out of a (former) Labor government’s desire to slow the numbers of asylum seekers arriving by boat in Australia which had been increasing steadily since 2009. In order to combat people smuggling in May 2011 they reached a transfer agreement with Malaysia which facilitated the policy of sending some 400 irregular maritime arrivals to a third country – Malaysia – ostensibly as a form of deterrent to others contemplating a voyage by sea to Australia to seek refugee protection. In return, Australia offered to accept, over a four-year period, 4000 people from Malaysia who were registered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as refugees in need of protection from persecution and awaiting third country resettlement.

M70 is a decision about the interpretation of particular provisions in the Migration Act 1958, provisions which were interconnected with international human rights law principles. It is interesting because it reveals the High Court’s willingness, by a majority (6:1) to subject the executive to a relatively intense level of scrutiny where human-rights based limits on executive power are clearly supplied in legislation.

The declaration of Malaysia as a country to which people could be sent and the proposed removal of particular asylum seekers was to be carried out pursuant to powers contained in s 198A and s 198(2) of the Migration Act. In early August 2011, the Refugee and Immigration Legal Centre (Melbourne) secured temporary injunctions restraining the Commonwealth from proceeding with the removal of 16 people to Malaysia on 8 August, until the legality of the bi-lateral arrangement could be determined by the HCA.

Behind the legal challenges were, respectively, concerns about possible persecution, discrimination towards and mistreatment of Shia Muslims in Malaysia, and that removing unaccompanied minors to Malaysia was not in their best interests.

The challenge before the HCA focused on the scope of international law obligations directly related to s 198A Migration Act. Relevantly, s 198A provided:

(1) An officer may take an offshore entry person from Australia to a country in respect of which a declaration is in force under subsection (3).

…

(3) The Minister may: (a) declare in writing that a specified country:

(i) provides access, for persons seeking asylum, to effective procedures for assessing their need for protection; and

(ii) provides protection for persons seeking asylum, pending determination of their refugee status; and

(iii) provides protection to persons who are given refugee status, pending their voluntary repatriation to their country of origin or resettlement in another country; and

(iv) meets relevant human rights standards in providing that protection.

[Emphasis added.]

The plaintiffs argued that the Immigration Minister had misapprehended the criteria that conditioned the exercise of his declaratory power: that the reference to ‘effective’ procedures, found in s 198A(3) sub-paragraph (i), should be understood as meaning ‘implemented in domestic law’, and that a proper construction of the word ‘protection’, found in sub-paragraphs (ii)–(iii), extended beyond Article 33 of the 1951 Refugee Convention (non-refoulement provision) to include some, but not all, of the human rights contained in the Refugee Convention.

It was also submitted that the language of sub-paragraph (iv) was informed by generally accepted human rights obligations under international law instruments. These arguments were advanced on the premise that the meaning to be given to s 198A(3) should be guided by the purpose of the Migration Act, which contains an elaborate and interconnected set of statutory provisions directed to the purpose of responding to the international obligations which Australia has undertaken in the Refugee Convention and the Refugee Protocol.

Furthermore, and importantly, it was argued that it was appropriate to characterise the criteria framing the declaratory power as ‘jurisdictional facts’ – meaning that the Minister’s power to make a valid declaration could not be made without particular facts prevailing.

On the facts, the plaintiffs pointed to the non-binding and unenforceable nature of the political agreement between Australia and Malaysia, and a report of mistreatment of non-nationals, as evidence that the criteria in subsection 198A(3) paragraph (a) properly construed were not, in fact, met.

End.