LAWS3701 Administrative Law

Study Guide

Workshop Three: Reviewing Government Action Via Administrative Tribunals

Introduction to administrative – merits – review

“Merits review provided by the AAT was understood to be utterly different from supervision for legal error available in judicial review”

Access to an independent review of government decisions is a key component of access to justice. Merits review and judicial review are two ways of enabling individuals affected by specific government actions to challenge those actions. For many people merits review is their only contact with government decision-makers, with comparatively few matters proceeding to court and judicial review. In large part this is because merits review is easier to access, is cheaper and less complex, and people don’t necessarily require legal assistance to effectively secure access to justice (but note their particular circumstances may dictate the need for legal representation). It is also because many grievances are satisfactorily resolved via merits review, therefore judicial review becomes unnecessary to redress a person’s grievances.

Merits review entails reconsideration of the substance – the merits – of an administrative decision. There is no fundamental (or entrenched) right to seek merits review, as there is for judicial review under the common law and Constitution respectively, it is a creature of statute. Therefore, what merits review means, and entails, is context (and statute) dependent. It is up to parliament to determine whether to provide merits review over executive action, and if so, what precise form that review will take.

The creation of a general system of external merits review dates back to the 1970s, and an official recognition that judicial (legality) review was an imperfect and inadequate system for enabling people to test the substance (merits) of government decisions. Not only was judicial review difficult to access and complex to navigate but it offered a very limited form of review based on ‘legality’ or ‘questions of law’ (as we discussed in workshop two) due to constitutional constraints stemming from the separation of powers.

The growth of tribunals as part of Australia’s system of public administration reflects changes that occurred in Britain during the first part of the 20th century. The increased degree of state regulation during this period saw Australia follow the British tradition, establishing boards and tribunals in an ad hoc manner to regulate particular classes of social and economic activity, in respect of tax administration and war veterans’ pensions, for example. In the mid-1970s, legislative reforms were implemented by the Commonwealth Parliament that, along with statutory reform of judicial review, included the establishment of a generalist review tribunal, namely the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT), which was a well-known example of an Australian administrative tribunal (though it was replaced by the Administrative Review Tribunal or ART in 2024).

The administrative law reforms at the Commonwealth level in the 1970s influenced the development of administrative law in the Australian States and Territories. Examining the ART illustrates how the principles, procedures and powers of tribunals operate more broadly. But it is important to appreciate that the concept of a tribunal is not fixed. While there are common features shared by all tribunals there are also crucial differences, in particular between the functioning of federal and state/territory tribunals (in part, due to the different application of the separation of powers doctrine at the federal and state/territory levels).

Federal (and State/Territory) administrative tribunals are at the core of administrative adjudication in Australia, providing external and (in theory, if not always in practice) independent review of government decision-making across diverse areas of regulation, including: social security; (ADF) veteran’s entitlements; migration and citizenship; national security; tax administration; child protection; and adult guardianship, among others.  Administrative review enables citizens and non-citizens to seek redress of their grievances against the state with respect to administrative decisions they disagree with, simply on the basis the decisions are incorrect, unfair or because there may be a more preferable course of action available.

Administrative review before a tribunal, such as the ART, secures accountability over executive decisions that affect people’s rights and interests, and in respect of which people are affected because they think that the government has been substantively wrong in its decision-making. For example

in relation to an income tax assessment, or entitlement to financial support, e.g. via the age pension, disability support pension, or veteran’s allowance (‘income maintenance decisions’);

a protection visa (for refugees) or business or student visa;

a licence to fly a commercial/private aircraft, or a licence to carry on a particular profession, such as a tax agent, investment advisor or migration agent (termed, ‘occupational regulation’).

Plainly, these sorts of decisions impact on very serious matters affecting people’s lives and liberty, health and wellbeing, and financial security. Indeed, a facet of modern government is the ever-increasing influence of government action on private interests. All the matters outlined above involve administrative decision-making by public officials. They are all part of the executive actions of government. Judicial (legality) review enables the correction of legal errors in respect of administrative actions but does not permit the actions to be corrected if they are simply substantively wrong (unless a relevant legal error is also present).

Why have merits review?

Merits review has been created because public decision-making can be complex, and humans are fallible and err from time to time. It is perfectly natural that government officials who are tasked with applying complex (and frequently changing) laws and policies to individual cases may make mistakes, or officials might get legal advice from government lawyers that turns out to be wrong.

From the government’s perspective it is preferable to have a more cost-effective and timely means for people to redress their grievances against the state, rather than going to court and trying to argue the merits of decisions. Additionally, merits review is a form of quality assurance, and can lead to improvements in the quality and consistency of administrative decisions. Indeed, the presence of merits review mechanisms can mean primary decision-makers take greater care with their decisions because there is a chance they might be subjected to further scrutiny, and perhaps criticism, later on.

Why choose merits review?

Merits review is comparatively cheaper, quicker, and easier to access, and the procedures are also more informal compared to litigation in court. Indeed, some tribunal proceedings can be conducted purely on the ‘papers’ without an oral hearing, or alternatively, in some specialist tribunals only the applicant may be present before the adjudicator with the government unrepresented having tendered written submissions. Because merits review is comparatively easier to access and navigate, the assistance of a lawyer is often unnecessary. Finally, merits review offers the potential of a fresh decision, setting aside the original decision and substituting a new decision instead. By contrast, in judicial (legality) review proceedings remedial powers are more limited because it is not the court’s constitutional role to determine what the ‘best’ decision is (on the merits). This supplies another reason for people to favour merits review over judicial review because the real issues for people relate to substantive fairness and not procedural fairness or questions of law (e.g. the correct interpretation of a statutory provision).

Are all executive (administrative) decisions subject to merits review?

Not all executive decisions are subject to merits review. There may be some decisions that the executive branch considers do not lend themselves to independent merits review; this may be because of the nature of the decision itself, for instance decisions that are highly sensitive or highly political. One such example is national security assessments adversely affecting non-citizens in Australia. Where non-citizens’ visas are refused or cancelled on adverse security grounds (following an assessment by the Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation) there is no right to merits review before an independent tribunal. This is in contrast to security-based decisions affecting citizens who do have access to the Administrative Review Tribunal to appeal adverse security assessments.  Parliament has effectively endorsed such a lack of access through failing to extend the jurisdiction of the Administrative Review Tribunal to hear appeals from non-citizens in such matters.

Internal and external review

There are often several levels of merits review. Merits review can first be sought internally, that is to say, people can seek a reconsideration of a decision by the same department that made the decision. It can also be carried out by external specialist and/or generalist tribunals. Let us take, as an example, the case of a person who believes that Centrelink have made an error about their student (ABSTUDY) or family payment (childcare support). They can request a full explanation of the decision. Further, they can seek and obtain and internal review by calling Centrelink, visiting in person or completing a review form, and subsequently appeal (on the merits) to the Administrative Review Tribunal (there are three tiers of review at the ART). In addition to a second ART review of certain social security reviews, there is also the potential for review by an ART guidance and appeals panel.  From the ART, an appeal on a question of law can be made to the Federal Court, with an onward right of appeal to the High Court.

Conversely, where decision-making power is vested, personally, in the Minister who formally heads the government department, there is very rarely provision for an internal review because the Minister is the highest-ranking official within a department. Moreover, if the decision-making area is a sensitive one (as discussed above) there may be no external merits review before a tribunal available either. So, the diagram below illustrates how decision-making progressed in the infamous case of Dr Haneef, who had his visa (unlawfully) cancelled in 2007 by the (then) Immigration Minister Kevin Andrews under s 501(3) Migration Act 1958 (Cth).

The Immigration Minister’s decision to cancel Dr Haneef’s business visa on the basis that he failed a statutory test (the ‘character test’), due to his familial relationship with two cousins involved in terrorist attacks in the United Kingdom, was based on a misunderstanding of the law. Spender J held that the Minister had misconstrued the law (s 501(6) Migration Act 1958). Spender J decided that this provision did not apply to people who had merely innocent associations with suspected terrorists. This decision by a single judge of the Federal Court was later confirmed on appeal to the Full Court of the Federal Court.

The function of tribunals

Tribunals are an indispensable part of the modern liberal democratic state, playing an essential role in delivering civil and administrative justice. They may be described as the ‘face of justice’ in government’s dealings with the people. The role of administrative tribunals is broader than the courts; tribunals are not confined to reviewing cases in the search for legal errors in the methods by which decisions were reached, as the courts are when engaging in judicial (legality) review. Simply put, this means that they determine what the ‘best’ decision is, substantively, taking into account the established facts and applying the law and policy to those facts as found, and reaching a decision. Administrative tribunals offer independent resolution of issues arising between individual and the state, often with experienced lawyers and specialist lay persons deciding matters. That said, part of the controversy around the former AAT in recent times was due to the relative inexperience of some appointees, and this led to the replacement of the AAT by the ART and a more transparent appointments process.

In addition to ‘public sector’ dispute resolution, state tribunals also decide matters arising between private parties, such as tenancy or consumer disputes (and some tribunals do both, such as QCAT in Queensland) but these ‘private’ disputes are not our concern in administrative law.  Moreover, state tribunals (such as QCAT) often deal explicitly with human rights cases including, child protection, adult guardianship, and anti-discrimination matters.

As we discussed in workshop two, there is a constitutional imperative for federal administrative tribunals to undertake merits review; namely, Ch. III (federal) courts are limited to ascertaining, declaring and enforcing the law. By virtue of Ch. III of the Constitution, they’re precluded from exercising any non-judicial powers, such as administrative or arbitral powers.  (Note this limitation does not apply to the state courts where the separation of powers is relatively less stringent).

In addition to constitutional constraints, tribunals offer a cheaper, quicker, and relatively more informal mode of adjudication, which means that they function and proceed differently to the courts. However, while freed of some of the procedural and evidential constraints that fetter the courts, tribunals are nonetheless obliged to accord procedural fairness (a fair hearing before an independent and unbiased decision-maker) to those appearing before them. Additionally, administrative tribunals have different remedial powers when compared to the courts engaging in judicial review.

By enabling government decisions to be challenged before tribunals, individuals can require officials to explain and justify their decisions openly and transparently, so merits review (and judicial review) promotes a culture of justification, an aspect of the rule of law.

Where do tribunals fit in the system of government – executive or judicial?

Within the traditional, tripartite, separation of powers, tribunals are located within the executive branch of government in Australia. Confusion sometimes arises because tribunals, like courts, adjudicate matters arising between parties, they interpret and apply the law to facts, as do courts, their proceedings are held in public (usually) as are courts, they must give reasons for their decisions (so too the courts). Therefore, tribunals are sometimes labelled as ‘court substitutes’, or their hearings and procedures are characterised as ‘quasi-judicial’. Certainly, administrative tribunals are under a duty to ‘act judicially’, but only in the limited sense that they (like the courts) are to exercise their powers independently and in an unbiased and procedurally fair manner.

Tribunals may be said to straddle the executive and judicial branches or occupy a space in-between the executive and judicial branches of government. They are at the upper rung of the administrative hierarchy — the last rung of decision-making before the courts. The diagram below illustrates the point in respect of a war veteran’s (pension-related) grievance.

At the lowest rung of the government hierarchy, the initial decision on a veteran’s pension/allowance entitlement under the Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986 (Cth) is administered by the Repatriation Commission. From that government decision maker, if problems arise, then there is a first-tier review before the Veterans’ Review Board (a tribunal) on the merits of the original decision. A person aggrieved by the determination of the VRB may seek a subsequent review by appealing to the ART (again, on the merits of the decision about their entitlements).

From the ART (assuming no guidance appeals panel of the ART is established) there is an onward right of appeal, but it is limited to legal (not factual) issues. The appeal to the Federal Court of Australia (FCA) (‘on a question of law’) is broadly, functionally, equivalent to a judicial review. This restriction on the right of appeal to the FCA ensures that the merits of decisions are dealt with by the ART. Decisions of the Federal Court, on questions of law, can be appealed to the High Court.

In summary, merits review is a flexible and accessible means of reviewing administrative action, but there are some weaknesses. For example, there is no inherent right to administrative (merits) review, as it is a creature of statute, and there may be perceptions that tribunals are not sufficiently independent of government due to government influence over appointments and continuing appointments. This issue, among others, is taken up below.

Tribunal independence

[…] when chips are down, it is not the Parliament that secures our freedom and our rights; it is certainly not the executive government that does so; it is the law in the hands of a fearless and independent judiciary and, nowadays, in the hands also of members of a peak administrative tribunal.

The independence of the courts from the executive and legislature is constitutionally confirmed by the Act of Settlement 1701 (UK) and protected by security of tenure given to judicial appointees, supplemented by other practices such as the courts’ control of their administration and budgets. But what of tribunals that are, formally, part of the executive branch in Australia? The institutional independence and integrity of tribunals is no less important than judicial independence.  The rationale for independence is the same; namely, the belief that those whose rights and interests are being adjudicated will only be satisfied that this is being done fairly if the individuals who are sitting in judgment are free to do so based solely on the evidence that is before them and their obligations under the law/policy.

As discussed above, administrative tribunals are a part of the administrative decision-making hierarchy, reviewing the merits of government officials’ decision-making. But conversely (as outlined above) tribunals are expected to exhibit detachment (impartiality) and procedural fairness, akin to the judicial model of adjudication. If tribunals were under the influence of government, public confidence in the integrity of tribunals as independent adjudicators capable of fairly and effectively holding the executive to account would soon evaporate. In short, processes whereby administrative decision-makers are recruited, appointed, remunerated, and treated are of central importance. These issues are taken up below with reference to the ART.

The ART falls within the portfolio of the Attorney-General, and the recruitment and appointment of members of the ART is managed by the executive (ie Attorney-General’s Department) with the Governor-General formally appointing office-holders. Legal members of the tribunal require extensive skill and experience in resolving disputes and highly developed technical legal ability; they must be able to, inter alia, interpret complex legislation, understand legal arguments and be well versed in the requirements of procedural fairness. Therefore, recruitment and appointments processes must be robust, transparent and fair (merit-based).

The objectives of a proper recruitment and selection process are, firstly, to ensure the best possible candidates are appointed as decision-makers. The second is to promote public confidence in the integrity of the recruitment process itself, thereby reinforcing the perception that administrative review bodies are free from undue political influence and that its members are independently appointed. Plainly, if there is a public perception of undue party-political (or, ministerial) influence in appointments (colloquially, ‘jobs for the boys’), confidence in tribunals’ selection processes may be lost even if the appointees are well credentialed and competent. Arguably, there is a strong case for appointment by a panel independent of the executive, and this would reinforce the perception of tribunal independence.

The issue of transparent merit-based appointments to the predecessor body to the ART was taken up by the media in May 2016, when it was reported that 76 new appointments, or re-appointments, were made to the AAT by the Federal government in the week leading up to the federal election being called. Many of the appointments were uncontroversial and merited, but the timing of the announcement, and the fact that several appointees had very close ties to the government of the day, including former state and federal politicians/candidates/staffers, raised questions about ‘stacking’ and the integrity of the process. In 2019, an independent review of the AAT recommended that appointments or renewals to the AAT should be qualified lawyers (or competent accountants for tax matters) and on the basis of merit as a result of a transparent process. The swathe of ‘political’ appointments – of unmeritorious members – in preceding years had, arguably, led to delays and poor-quality decisions.  These concerns culminated in the repeal of the AAT Act and the creation of the ART in 2024.  Among the changes introduced in 2024 was a requirement in s 209 of the ART Act that the relevant Minister must establish an assessment panel to assess whether candidates for membership to the ART are suitable for appointment.

Generally, tribunal members do not enjoy the security of tenure that judges (life tenure) do; appointments are for a fixed term of several years (up to five years at the ART), so this can provide a relative degree of security for members. But the government (the Attorney General in practice) is ultimately tasked with determining re-appointments, which are not automatic. This is important because decision-makers up for re-appointment might be too mindful of the way in which their decisions are perceived by the government, perhaps even fearful of overturning decisions of government departments, not wishing to be seen as biting the hand that feeds them. And adjudicators who are self-conscious or even acting self-interestedly (self-preservation) are clearly vulnerable to the charge that they are lacking independence and impartiality. Moreover, if the process of re-appointment is opaque to the public, then when highly regarded members of the tribunal are not re-appointed upon expiration of their appointment period, there can be speculation about undue political influences which has a damaging impact on the integrity of the process and the tribunal.

A related question to security of tenure is the processes governing the removal of tribunal members. Judicial officers are, generally, subject to removal only in exceptional circumstances, via a complex process involving parliament. This protects judges’ independence by preventing abuse of the removal process, but what of tribunal members (judicial members aside) who are part of the executive branch of government? What criteria are employed to determine if a tribunal member should be removed from office, and who gets to decide?  Grounds for removal from the ART are set out clearly in s 221 ART Act 2024, and include serious misconduct, incapacity, bankruptcy or other (outside) employment, and termination is by the Governor-General on recommendation from the relevant Minister.

Remuneration is an important issue; it can encourage people with higher-level skills to apply for and remain in an administrative tribunal. So it must be at a level that properly reflects the role of tribunal members in providing high-level external review of administrative decisions. Determination of salaries is an important aspect of tribunal independence; remuneration of ART members is, properly, in the hands of another independent tribunal (Remuneration Tribunal), and this process does not attract political controversy and adverse media attention which can attend the setting of public employees’ remuneration levels.

In conclusion, the ART is a ‘generalist’ tribunal that affords people an avenue to challenge the conduct and decisions of various public (government) figures/agencies across many regulatory areas on the merits. Accordingly, it is important to fully understand merits review and how the ART functions, its procedures and remedial powers.

Workshop Three:  Merits Review

Required Reading

R. Creyke “Administrative Tribunals” in M. Groves and H.P. Lee, Australian Administrative Law: Fundamentals, Principles and Doctrines (2007, CUP) Ch 5 (Administrative tribunals) (e-book accessible via Law Library catalogue); and

M Allars, “The Nature of Merits Review: A Bold Vision Realised in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal” (2013) 41 Federal Law Review 197-226, especially pp 197-216 and 221-223 (para ending — ‘This function is not full merits review’); and

Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024 (Cth) go here

# Workshop Questions

## Part A. Consolidating material covered in the lecture/learning guide: quick-fire questions

**(1) What is the difference between merits and judicial review? And why do the courts not interfere with determinations about the merits of executive decisions?**

**(2) Why do you think Federal, State and Territory parliaments provide avenues of merits review over government action?**



**(3) The ART functions as a ‘court-substitute’, but where is it located in the tripartite system of government and what type of public power does it exercise?**

**(4) It is imperative that tribunals are independent of the executive if they are to command public confidence; what features are intended to ensure the ART is not unduly influenced by executive government? (Review the ART Act for answers). Relatedly, what reasons were stated for the abolition of the AAT in 2024?**

## **Part B. What are the guiding principles for administrative (merits) review hearings?**

You must come prepared to explain the substantive, procedural and remedial aspects of ‘merits review’ in the ART:

**(5) It may be said with certainty that the ART’s powers and function are more than supervisory. With careful reference to the following cases be prepared to carefully explain the nature and scope of administrative (merits) review with a very close eye on the following cases:**

Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Drake No.1) (1979) 46 FLR 409, (especially the joint judgment of Bowen CJ and Deane J at 412-414, and 419-422 where the court considered the questions of whether (i) a federal judge could validly (ie consistently with the separation of powers under the Constitution) serve on the AAT; and (ii) in light of Drake (No 1) explain what the joint judgment said about the ‘character’ and de novo function of the AAT.

The role of government policy in tribunal adjudication: Go on to study Re Drake (No 2) (1979) 2 ALD 635 and be prepared to explain what Brennan J (sitting as a presidential member of the AAT) stated about the function of the AAT when applying government policy (policy is a form of ‘soft law’ – supplying guidance for decision-makers that supplement ‘hard law’ in primary or secondary legislation). Has the ART Act made any changes regarding these issues?

The leading High Court of Australia (HCA) decision on the role and function of federal merits review tribunals is: Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority (2008) 235 CLR 286, (read the judgements of Kirby and Kiefel JJ carefully) and then consider and answer the questions below:

What was said in Shi v MARA about any temporal limitations on the material/evidence that the AAT could (permissibly) review when considering Shi’s integrity and fitness to provide immigration advice and assistance to non-citizens?

In light of the decision in Shi v MARA Allars discusses ‘hybrid merits review’, which refers to those occasions when the AAT was not simply ‘doing over’ what the original decision-maker did (ie a de novo review). Give examples of the circumstances in which the ART may do something less than a full de novo review (Kirby and Kiefel JJ give examples in Shi v MARA).

**(6) Procedure and evidence: A careful examination of the statutory provisions governing the ART’s procedures, and inquiry into related superior court jurisprudence, reveals that concepts drawn from the practice and procedure of the courts of law in civil litigation are not strictly analogous and applicable in an administrative decision-making context.**

Read the factual precis and summary of judgment in Pochi v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (1979) 36 FLR 482 and then be prepared to explain what the AAT determined about the applicable standard/sufficiency of proof and the relevance of rules of evidence in tribunal proceedings (at pp 490 – 494). Go on to consider what the tribunal found in Pochi’s case (at pp 507-511) in respect of s 35 AAT Act and the importance of public hearings and (per s 35(2)) the circumstances in which the public, or perhaps a party to proceedings, may reasonably be excluded from proceedings such that AAT proceedings are held in camera. Compare s 69 of the ART Act.

Read extracts from Sun v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (2016) 243 FCR 220, especially paras [63]-[65] and [78] and consider the court’s analysis about the relevance of the concept of burden/onus of proof, drawn from civil litigation, for the conduct of administrative reviews.

**(7) The remedial powers of the ART are distinguishable from the powers exercised by the superior courts in judicial review proceedings: identify and explain the remedial powers of the ART and also outline broadly how those powers differ from judicial review remedies (the writs: prohibition, certiorari, and mandamus - or the statutory equivalents)?**

End.