SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL HANDLEY JA, GILES AND COHEN AJJA CA 40037/95 9-11,17 December 1996, 25 February 1998

## Headnotes

Dust diseases — occupant in mining town — duty of care — whether owed by holding company or miner — whether owed to occupant. Damages — general damages — wage and related losses ReservedBC9800336 at 1 Mrs Olson contracted mesothelioma from exposure to blue asbestos while a small child (to age 27 months) at Wittenoom. The exposure included from tailings used for roads, the airport, the golf course, and as fill in backyards. Wittenoom was a "company town". Mrs Olson claimed damages from CSR, the holding company of the company which mined the asbestos, and ABA the mining company. It was held in the Dust Diseases Tribunal that she was owed a duty of care, that the duty of care was owed by CSR as well as ABA, and that the duty of care was breached at least by failure to warn Mrs Olson's family that she was and they were at risk of injury. Substantial damages were awarded. Held:

1. Whatever duty of care was owed to Mrs Olson was owed by CSR as well as ABA. On the facts CSR was conducting the mining operations through ABA and was in a relationship of proximity to her.

Craig v Lake Asbestos of Quebec 843 F 2d 145 (1988); Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd (1989) 16 NSWLR 549; Smith Stone & Knight v Birmingham Corporation (1939) 4 All ER 116 referred to. BC9800336 at 2

2. By majority (Handley JA dissenting), a duty of care was owed to Mrs Olson because it was known that blue asbestos was dangerous, there was a foreseeable risk that exposure of the kind to which Mrs Olson was subjected would result in asbestosis or bronchogenic carcinoma, mesothelioma was harm of the same kind, and there was proximity such that a warning of the risk was called for.

Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes (CA, 29 July 1997, unreported) followed; Bale v Seltsam Pty Ltd (23 August 1996, unreported) referred to.

3. The damages should be reduced because -

(a) (by majority, Cohen AJA dissenting) the general damages were excessive;

(b) in assessing wage loss and associated lost superannuation, future full time employment and progression in the public service had erroneously been treated as certainties instead of matters of probability.

Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) 169 CLR 638 and Sellers v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 333 applied.

## Handley JA

BC9800336 at 1 In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading, in draft form, the reasons for judgment of the other members of the Court. I have the misfortune to differ from my brethren on some of the issues relevant to liability, but agree with Giles AJA on the issues relevant to damages. Giles AJA has set out the relevant facts and the history of the litigation, and there is no need for me to repeat these matters. I entirely agree with the conclusion reached by the trial Judge, and the other members of the Court, that CSR Ltd (CSR) was and is in the same position in this case as its wholly-owned subsidiary, Australian Blue Asbestos Ltd (ABA). Under the management agreement of 23 June 1943, ABA appointed CSR "to Act as its managing agent ... with full and absolute authority to do all things necessary for the proper management BC9800336 at 2 and control of the business and undertaking of (ABA)". The acts and omissions of CSR in its management of the business and undertaking of ABA became the acts and omissions of its principal, but this does not relieve CSR of personal responsibility. An agent acting within the scope of its authority is personally liable for torts committed by it. See Bowstead and Reynolds on Agency, 16th Ed, 1996, article 115, p635. I also agree that those companies owed a duty of care to the class of persons which included Mrs Olson provided it was reasonably foreseeable that members of that class might suffer physical injury as a result of the acts and omissions of CSR and ABA in exposing them to asbestos dust in the township of Wittenoom. However in my opinion this was not foreseeable between 1959 and 1961. Mrs Olson was born in the town on 22 September 1959 and left with her parents on or very shortly after 1 December 1961 (AB 250, 3042, 3045). Her father worked as a craftsman in the mill office located some 13 miles or so out of town. The companies had used mill tailings comprising silica with 2% residual asbestos in the township as road base and landfill for footpaths, the golf course, race track, and the grounds of houses and other buildings. This was done by or with the acquiescence of the mine management, who lived with their own families in the town, and without any challenge, based on risks from purely environmental exposure, from the officers of the Western Australian Government with responsibilities in the town or the mining area. BC9800336 at 3 As a result, Mrs Olson was exposed to asbestos dust generated by traffic or wind from surfaces covered with tailings, from contact with her father when he returned from work in dusty clothes, and from contact with tailings when she played in the grounds of her parents' home. It is now well known that blue asbestos (crocidolite) is extremely dangerous, and that even modest exposure can cause mesothelioma. Growing awareness of the risks of exposure to asbestos dust eventually led to the closure of the asbestos industry, at least in the western world. Wittenoom mine was closed in 1966, blue asbestos was made a prohibited import into this country in 1970 (798), and in 1979 the UK Advisory Committee recommended that the use of blue asbestos be totally prohibited in the United Kingdom (235). It is nevertheless important to remember that in 1959-1961 asbestos was a major article of world commerce and had been for many years. Merewether and Price, "Report on Effects of Asbestos Dust on the Lungs" 1930 (the Merewether report), wrote "Asbestos is very largely used in industry, being an important constituent of many different products" (1635) and added (1647) that these included asbestos yarn and cloth, mill board, paper, asbestos cement sheets, tiles and other building materials, sheet material of rubber or bituminous mixtures containing asbestos, insulation materials, brake and clutch linings, packing and jointings, asbestos-covered electric conductors, electrodes, cables and wiring, coils for electric machinery and other products. BC9800336 at 4 Dreesen and Ors, "A Study of Asbestosis in the Asbestos Textile Industry", (Dreesen), 1938, United States Public Health Service, wrote (1901): "Several important properties of asbestos have led to its widespread use in industry. As everyone knows, it is non combustible and an excellent insulation against heat and electricity ... Utilising these properties of asbestos industries have been developed in this country which employed more than 6,000 men and women in slightly more than 35 establishments in 1935". Hueper "Occupational Tumours and Allied Diseases", 1942, (Heuper) described by Professor Ferguson as a leading text (846), wrote (1997): "The production of asbestos has risen enormously in recent years. It received this great impetus from the automobile industry. The total production in 1868 was 200 tons, in 1880 600 tons, in 1925 330,000 tons, and in 1929 430,000 tons. The United States is the principal consumer of this product. More than twelve thousand persons are employed in the chief asbestos plants of this country ... Asbestos is employed for a great variety of purposes, such as the manufacture of combustible and insulating materials". In 1963, Thompson & Ors "Asbestos as the Modern Urban Hazard", South African Medical Journal (2312), recorded that at that time 2,400,000 tons of asbestos were being used each year. Asbestos, despite its widespread use and valuable properties, was known to be dangerous long before 1959. In particular, exposure to asbestos dust was known to be dangerous. The risk first identified was asbestosis, and the Merewether report in 1930 (1630), which documented BC9800336 at 5 the effects of asbestos dust on exposed workers, led to the introduction of stringent safety legislation in the United Kingdom. The Chief Inspector of Factories in his summary of this report (1633) wrote: "Dr Merewether's investigations on the medical side are of great scientific value. They establish the facts that the inhalation of asbestos dust over a period of years results in the development of a serious type of fibrosis of the lungs, that the development of the disease varies in direct proportion to the length of the exposure to dust, and that susceptibility to the disease is not affected either by age or sex. The remedy for these conditions is to be found, as in the case of so many industrial diseases, in the suppression of dust". Dreesen reported (1901): "When asbestos dust is inhaled daily, year in and year out, a lung disease termed asbestosis may develop. In many respects asbestosis resembles silicosis, but it differs ... in several important particulars ...". Dreesen was based on the examination of 541 men and women employed, or formerly employed, in three asbestos textile factories in the United States. A total of 242 dust counts were made in these factories to enable the dust exposure of each worker to be estimated. The authors wrote (1900): "The percentage of persons in different occupational groups who were affected by asbestosis or any of its symptoms varied with" the average dust concentration to which they were subjected and with their length of employment. The only cases of asbestosis, three in number, found below five million particles per cubic foot were diagnosed as doubtful; well-established cases occurred at higher concentrations. It appears from these data that if asbestos dust concentrations in the air breathed are kept below this limit, new cases of asbestosis would not appear". BC9800336 at 6 In the body of their report, they wrote (1946): "Ideally, a threshold concentration of dust should be the highest dust concentration that would not produce pneumoconiosis in originally healthy workmen during their entire working life ... Because of the importance of the problem, it seems to be desirable to use such data as are at hand to define tentative safe working conditions that may serve as standards for the guidance of factory managers and engineers until more complete data are available ... None of the 39 persons exposed to dust concentrations below 2.5 million particles per cubic foot had a case of asbestosis, though, as a matter of fact, only 6 persons had been employed more than 5 years. Three doubtful cases of asbestosis fell in the range 2.5 to 4.9 million particles. Because clean cut cases of asbestosis were found only in dust concentrations exceeding 5 million particles per cubic foot, and because they were not found at lower dust concentrations, 5 million particles per cubic foot may be regarded tentatively as the threshold value for asbestos-dust exposure until better data are available". In 1942 Heuper stated: "Asbestosis usually develops after an exposure of three to fifteen years ... but may not produce subjective symptoms until many years after the cessation of exposure to asbestos material (1998) ... It is only in very recent years that serious consideration has been given to the possibility of a cancerigenic action of asbestosis upon the lungs ... Since 1935 an appreciable number of cases of asbestosis associated with carcinoma of the lung have been reported ...". (2000) The link between asbestosis and lung cancer was definitively established by Doll in 1955 in his "Mortality from Lung Cancer in Asbestos Workers" (Doll), published in the British Journal of Industrial Medicine (2184). His summary stated (2189): BC9800336 at 7 "From the data it can be concluded that lung cancer was a specific industrial hazard of certain asbestos workers and that the average risk among men employed for 20 or more years has been of the order of ten times that experienced by the general population". The risk of contracting mesothelioma from exposure to asbestos dust was barely hinted at before the Wagner article in 1960. The Annual Report of the Chief Inspector of Factories (UK) 1947 (2100) reviewed 235 deaths, between 1924 and 1946, caused by asbestosis, or where asbestosis was present at autopsy. Carcinoma of the lungs or pleura was present in 31 cases (13.2%) (2108, 2110), but the average age of those with cancer was 52.1 years, and the average duration of exposure to asbestos was 16.5 years (2110). There was nothing to indicate that the carcinomas of the pleura were mesotheliomas, and Professor Ferguson said that lung cancer frequently involves the pleura (853). "Complications of Asbestosis", British Medical Journal, April 1960 (2284) reported the results of a Clinicopathological Conference which reviewed a single case of fatal asbestosis. The deceased had 11 years' industrial exposure to asbestos. Dr Hugh-Jones, in summing-up, said (2290): "Carcinoma of the lung is a serious and well recognised complication of asbestosis. Its frequency in asbestosis is difficult to determine, for it is now a common condition in the general population. Moreover exposure to asbestos may have occurred many years before the cancer develops. Nevertheless the paper by Doll makes it fairly clear that a patient with asbestosis has a risk about 10 times that of the general population of getting carcinoma of the lung. Another hazard is mesothelioma of the pleura. This rather rare BC9800336 at 8 tumour may draw attention to the fact that a patient hasworked in asbestos dust". (emphasis supplied) In August 1960 a seminal article by Wagner and others, "Diffuse Pleural Mesothelioma and Asbestos Exposure in the North Western Cape Province" (Wagner), appeared in the British Journal of Industrial Medicine (2244). The authors noted that "mesothelioma of the pleura is regarded as an uncommon tumour", but stated that in the 4 years before April 1960, they had seen 33 histologically proven cases, 28 of which had some association with the asbestos mines in the North Western Cape Province, and another 4 had exposure to asbestos in industry. In a postscript of June 1960, the authors reported a total of 47 cases of mesothelioma, in 45 of which "a possible association with exposure to crocidolite has been established" (2255). The article continued: "In the remaining 25 cases we can only present circumstantial evidence of exposure to asbestos dust ... 18 of these 25 cases were born in the vicinity of the mines and 2 arrived in the district as infants. Of these 18 people 11 admit definite childhood exposure to the dust and 2 others were exposed industrially in later life. In addition 2 patients with childhood exposure later worked in the asbestos mines. Three cases arrived in the region at an older age but were employed either in the mines or in transporting asbestos. A further 3 of these 25 cases have had industrial exposure, and in only one case did the relatives deny any exposure to asbestos dust". (2253) There was an important qualification (2253): "In our series of mesothelioma, histological evidence of asbestosis has been observed in 8 of the 10 cases in which BC9800336 at 9 lung parenchyma was included in the specimen examined. No lung tissue was present in the biopsies from the . remaining 23 cases. It was only in the 4 cases that came to necropsy that large sections of the lung tissue were available for examination. In all of these specimens evidence of asbestosis was found". In other words there was a very high correlation with asbestosis (80%) in cases where lung tissue was available. In all but one of these cases (Table 3, 2254), the patient had a known history of industrial or mining exposure. In 17 of the 25 cases where biopsies were not available, the history obtained by the authors established environmental exposure, although in one case, the patient had also worked in an asbestos warehouse as a clerk, and in 3 cases, the patient had also been involved in the transport of asbestos by donkey wagon. One inference from the article, based on the 10 cases where biopsies were available, was that mesothelioma was a complication of asbestosis. Another inference was that modest environmental or employment exposure which could not produce asbestosis could produce mesothelioma in susceptible individuals (2254). The first report in the Australian literature was by Dr McNulty in the Medical Journal of Australia, published in December 1962, "Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma in an Asbestos Worker" (3838). The patient was seen on 25th October 1960 with obvious chest problems, and died of the disease in June 1961. He had worked for some 2 years at the Wittenoom Mill in 1948-1950. The doctor agreed that he had had heavy exposure to dust (197) and gross asbestosis (186). The paper stated that this was BC9800336 at 10 believed to be the first case of pleural mesothelioma reported in an asbestos worker outside South Africa (3838). One of its conclusions was that, "There appears to be a relationship between exposure to blue asbestos and the development of the pleural mesothelioma in this case" (3839). The author said that the words expressing this tentative conclusion were used advisedly (198). There was nothing in this paper about any environmental risk (220). The plaintiff's case on causation was that at some stage before December 1961, the companies should have warned their employees, and the adult members of their families, that they and their children ran the risk of contracting mesothelioma in many years time as a result of their industrial or environmental exposure to blue asbestos. The plaintiff's mother gave evidence that she would have acted on such a warning and left the town with her children without delay. Without any such warning, the plaintiff's father gave a month's notice of termination on 27 October 1961 (3042). Mesothelioma is dose related in the sense that increased exposure increases the chance of contracting the disease (Professor Ferguson, 794). It differs from asbestosis where accumulating fibres progressively "gum up the lungs" (795). The plaintiff may have inhaled the fatal fibres before the Wagner article appeared in Australia, but as further exposure increased the risk of contracting the disease, causation has been properly found on this issue. See Commonwealth v McLean (1996) 41 NSWLR 389 at 408- 410. BC9800336 at 11 The real question, in my judgment, is whether the Wagner article required the companies to give a strong warning to their employees and families before the end of 1961. Labour turnover in the mine and mill was very high. The health problems associated with the high levels of dust exposure in the mine and mill were known to the union, the Mines Department and the Health Department, and a chest x-ray survey of workers in 1960 resulted in a number being advised to leave the industry because of the degree of asbestosis they had already developed (McNulty, 214). This, one would infer, became common knowledge in a company town, but it does not appear that anyone else took much notice. Wagner reported on deaths from mesothelioma in one area of South Africa. It said that it was a "preliminary publication" (2244), and that there was "a possible association" with exposure to crocidolite (2255). It became available in Australia about October 1960 (196, 228). At that stage no death from mesothelioma had been reported in this country where exposure to blue asbestos was involved, and such findings had not been reported elsewhere (3838). The mine at Wittenoom had only been in operation for 16 years, but blue asbestos had been extensively mined for many decades in other parts of the world without the link with mesothelioma being suspected. Dr McNulty, a chest physician with the Public Health Department of Western Australia, was responsible for ensuring that miners complied with a statutory requirement for initial and periodic medical examinations including chest x-rays (146). He was responsible for the Wittenoom chest BC9800336 at 12 x-ray surveys in 1959, 1960 and 1961 (178, 182, 164), and visited Wittenoom in 1959 and 1961. He was very concerned with excessive dust levels at the mine and mill and the effects on workers and his views are recorded in contemporary documents. Dr McNulty's report (13/1/60) to Dr King on the 1959 x-ray survey at Wittenoom (1421) stated that no new cases of asbestosis had been diagnosed since the previous survey, but that the length of exposure of workers contracting asbestosis or silicosis was much shorter than was the case with comparably employed men in the gold mining industry, and the extent of the disease was greater. He said that a disquieting feature was that asbestosis had been diagnosed in underground workers, although it was normally only a hazard for mill workers. The problem was disguised by high labour turnover, many workers lasting for less than a year, with less than 50% having had continuous employment for more than 4 years. However, 12% of those with over 4 years' exposure had silicosis or asbestosis, compared with 1% of workers in the gold mining industry with more than 10 years' exposure. He wrote that these figures illustrated "the grave hazard" at Wittenoom (1422). His letter to Mr Allan, the Mine Manager, of 4 December 1959 (1404) based on the same survey was more positive. It stated, "With a few exceptions, the health of the workers whom I examined at Wittenoom appeared excellent". He also said, "By and large I was favourably impressed by the working conditions" (following the opening of a new mine and the construction of a new mill), although he felt "that there is a BC9800336 at 13 particular problem and a particular hazard which has not yet been fully investigated or remedied". Dr McNulty wrote to the General Manager, State Government Insurance Office, Perth, on 17 March 1960 (4258) in relation to the same survey. He said that the workers with more than 4 years' exposure who had asbestosis appeared to have contracted the disease in the old mill, which was no longer in use, "and it is too early to assess the effect of the improved conditions of the new mill". The uncertain state of medical knowledge in Western Australia of the risks of asbestos at this stage was dealt with in the following passage: "Too few cases of asbestosis have been diagnosed and the time of observation has been too short, to reply adequately to your request for information. There are many references to the problem in the World literature, but the conclusions drawn are often value and, occasionally, contradictory ... There is statistical evidence to suggest that exposure to asbestos dust may cause lung cancer. The matter is controversial but lung cancer certainly appears to be more common in workers exposed to asbestos dust than comparably employed workers in other industries". (emphasis supplied) The doctor wrote to Mr Allan on 13 October 1960 (1410) about the latter's x-ray results, which indicated asbestosis complicated by silicosis, and warned him to avoid further exposure to harmful dust like the plague, but he was not advised to leave Wittenoom. The doctor's report on the 1960 Wittenoom chest x-ray survey (1419) revealed a serious problem with dust disease, and the doctor commented that it was only the huge labour turnover (70% of workers worked for 3 years or less) which prevented BC9800336 at 14 large numbers of men from being affected. Silicosis was a more serious problem than asbestosis (1420). The doctor thought that men employed in transporting asbestos to the coast, and workers engaged in loading it at the docks, should also be examined, but he did not refer to risks from purely environmental exposure. Dr McNulty wrote again to Mr Allan on 16 March 1961 (1411) with reference to the latter's x-ray results warning him that further exposure to asbestos or silica dust "must cease" apart from short inspection trips to the mill and mine. Mr Allan was not advised to leave Wittenoom. The doctor also wrote: 'You will appreciate that our experience of chest disease caused by asbestos is limited and indeed the various international experts publishing articles on it do not seem to know much more. This lessens the value of any advice which I can give. Unfortunately, with the numbers of men involved in the very few years, I shall soon be an expert on the course and prognosis of the disease". (emphasis supplied) The doctor had received Wagner some months before but did not refer to it, or to the risk of contracting mesothelioma from purely environmental exposure. On 5 October Dr Letham, Dr McNulty's superior, wrote to Mr Allan (1412) to arrange a meeting in Perth on 10 October to discuss the dust disease problem at Wittenoom, stating that the Department was becoming increasingly concerned at the number of employees, and ex-employees, who were suffering from asbestosis and/or silicosis. Dr McNulty prepared a report based on the 1961 chest x-ray survey which was distributed at BC9800336 at 15 that meeting (1413). He stated that he had details of 34 men seriously affected by asbestosis and silicosis, one of whom was dead, and at least another three were dying. In another 22 cases there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that they were developing disease. The men affected were the majority of workers who had remained at Wittenoom for more than 5 years, and the doctor wrote, "The real health hazard will not be realised for another 10 years, particularly the cancers". He also referred to the mesothelioma case he later wrote up in the Medical Journal of Australia stating: "The man who died was aged 48 and worked about 2 years in the mill. The post mortem showed gross asbestosis and silicosis and a malignant cancer of the pleura directly attributable to his work in Wittenoom. I am seriously concerned that these cancers of the pleura, which are being reported in large numbers from South Africa, are due to an individual susceptibility and minimal exposure to blue asbestos". He said that this was a reference to the patient's industrial exposure during his years in the mill, and that he had included this case to discuss with those in authority "that persons who worked at the mine and mill were in danger of getting this particular kind of disease" (220). (emphasis supplied) He did not refer during that meeting to Wagner or the risks from purely environmental exposure (220). About the same time Dr McNulty was attempting, in another way, to get CSR to take effective action to reduce the dust problems in the mine and mill. At his suggestion, Dr Hunt of Perth wrote on 25 July 1961 (1417) to Dr Rennie, a specialist chest physician in Sydney, who had BC9800336 at 16 professional and personal links with senior executives of CSR. Dr Hunt said that Doctors Letham and McNulty had been to see him about the situation at Wittenoom. They both regarded the working conditions there as "very poor" and "a public menace ... Apparently it is quite possible to be so badly dusted as to be totally and permanently incapacitated within 4 or 5 years. Both doctors are of the opinion that very urgent action is required" (1418). Dr Hunt added that the records, figures and films he had seen "are quite horrifying" (1419). This letter contained no reference to Wagner, or to risks from purely environmental exposure. Dr McNulty wrote direct to Dr Rennie on 18 September 1961. He referred to his concern at the number of men seriously affected by silicosis/asbestosis at relatively early ages and (after) short exposure. "These included a malignant pleural mesothelioma after 2 years as a shift boss in the mill." He added, "Even in the township much of the road material and path surfacing is made of waste material from the mine and blue asbestos fibres are obvious" (1414). He also wrote (1416): "The known hazard is real enough but reading papers on pleural mesothelioma (notably J C Wagner ... British Journal Indust Med 1960) ... one is left with a suspicion that a combination of individual idiosyncrasy and minimal asbestos exposure, such as from road surfacing, may be dangerous". (emphasis supplied) This, his first written reference to risks from purely environmental exposure, was written two and a half months before the plaintiff left Wittenoom. He wrote again on 25 October and provided further information about the former mill worker who had died from BC9800336 at 17 mesothelioma and said, "I am seriously concerned that these cancers of the pleura which are being reported in large numbers from South Africa, are due to an individual susceptibility and minimal exposure to blue asbestos". He said that he hoped that as a result of the meeting, "there is now a better appreciation of the seriousness of the consequences of dust in the mine and mill" (1427) (emphasis added). He wrote again to Dr Rennie on 10 December 1962 referring to the latest statistics on the incidence of silicosis and asbestosis and the current dust levels in the mine and mill, but did not refer to risks from purely environmental exposure. He added (3788): "I am still a little concerned about the carcinogenic effect of crocidolite and wish that the company wouldn't use its tailings for roads and paths. Tailings were used as filler at the golf course so that the poor devils inhale asbestos at recreation as well". (emphasis supplied) During his 1959 visit to Wittenoom, Dr McNulty expressed concern to mine management about the additional dust burden for workers because of the tailings in the town (169, 195, 214). However in 1959 and 1960 he did not believe that residents were in any danger from asbestos (195). He said that when he first read Wagner (185): "I had the impression ... that the situation at Wittenoom was different from the situation in South Africa and it was a much more intimate relationship between the environment (and) the people who were referred to in Wagner's paper ... and that Wittenoom ... being removed from the mine site, then their situation was not as acute ...". BC9800336 at 18 However he developed a growing conviction that the introduction of tailings had brought the mine to the town (185) as a result of the diagnosis of mesothelioma in the former mill worker who died in June 1961. He first raised his concern about the risks from purely environmental exposure with Dr Hunt in July 1961, although at that time he understood that the situation in South Africa "was quite different" from that at Wittenoom (215). He had not worn a respirator during his visits to the mine and mill in 1959 or 1961, and believed his exposure was sufficiently transitory not to pose a problem (217). He gave this evidence (236): "Q. It was not until the early 1960s after the development of the research into Wagner's work by others, that the risk of contracting an asbestos related disease from a small dose was revealed? A. That's right there were only two diseases, asbestosis and lung cancer and lung cancer was generally believed to require asbestosis, which meant a very high dose. Q. So that method of contracting an asbestos disease, that is to say by exposure to small doses and bystanders, was not one that was foreseeable by you until the early 1960s? A. Yes, that's right. Q. That would probably be somewhere around the 1962-63? A. No 61, 62, 63. Q. It was a gradual realisation of that position? A. Yes". (emphasis supplied) BC9800336 at 19 Dr McNulty never recommended that the mine or mill be closed down, or that people should leave the town (230). He could not remember giving anyone from ABA a copy of Wagner, but said that he would be surprised if he did not do so, but no particular occasion, date or year was identified (225). His reason for thinking that he had passed on the article was at the time he was preparing to write his note for the Medical Journal of Australia, which was published on 15 December 1962 (3838). He could therefore have passed on a copy of Wagner at any time between June 1961 and late 1962. He may have passed on a copy of Wagner to someone at ABA before Mr Olson gave notice, but the absence of any direct reference to this in the contemporary material indicates that he did not make any strong representations about the purely environmental risk. This is consistent with the fact that he did not recommend that the mine or mill be closed down, or that people should leave the town. The reaction of Dr McNulty to Wagner during 1960 and 1961 provides a reliable guide to the approach which reasonable persons, in the position of the companies, should have taken at the time. I do not think that the Court can properly find that the companies should have formed conclusions about the risks from purely environmental exposure which Dr McNulty did not form at the time. Other evidence strengthens these conclusions. In 1960-1961 Dr McNulty knew of Professor Willis and his opinion that mesothelioma was BC9800336 at 20 the end product of a metastatic process from a primary tumour elsewhere in the body (230). He agreed that the Professor was an eminent pathologist, that the controversy as to the nature of mesothelioma continued after Wagner, and that the Professor's view "was one generally held in the medical community" (230). On that view, exposure to asbestos dust did not cause mesothelioma. Professor Warren said that Wagner was not without some controversy when it came out, because of Professor Willis's views about mesothelioma which commanded considerable respect in Australian medical circles (4117). Wagner did not secure immediate acceptance. Professor Ferguson said that there was little immediate reaction to the article, and that this did not come until the New York conference on the biological effects of asbestos in 1964 (3799). There was evidence that only 4 copies of the journal in which Wagner was published were held in Australia at the time; 2 in New South Wales, and 2 in Western Australia (2771). Professor Ferguson read the article early in 1961, and in relation to the risks from purely environmental exposure "didn't relate it to experience in Australia" (802, 911), because in many of the cases reported in Wagner, there had been very considerable exposure to asbestos (802-3), and there was evidence of asbestosis (803). He said that persons in Wittenoom township "certainly weren't exposed ... to the sort of general atmospheric pollution with the blue asbestos fibres that they would have had around the villages in South Africa as described by Dr Wagner" (912). BC9800336 at 21 He said that in 1961 he would have believed that people in the township "were not at risk of known diseases" as a result of their asbestos exposure (927). Dr Joseph said he remembered reading Wagner after Dr McNulty's article appeared in December 1962 because this referred to Wagner, but he "might have read it before" (4200). Even if he did, he clearly did not take a great deal of notice until after Dr McNulty's article (compare his evidence on another occasion 3431, 3433 and 3470 which does not detract from the above). He also gave this evidence (4186): "Q. It would be, I suppose, correct to say that it wasn't until the mid-1960s that a general opinion endorsed Wagner's work of a definite causal relationship and indeed, went so far as to establish that asbestos inhalation is the only known cause of mesothelioma apart from possibly irradiation ... It was not until about 1965 that there appears to have been universal acceptance within the medical profession that in fact exposure to asbestos could be the cause of mesothelioma? A. That would be right". (emphasis supplied) At 4190 he gave this evidence: "Q. So that would it be fair to say that by 1965 there was medically acceptance that there was a link between the condition of mesothelioma and asbestos inhalation, is that correct? A. Yes. Q. That that link at that stage was between blue asbestos and the condition of mesothelioma? A. Yes. BC9800336 at 22 Q. That it was some time later that it became medical knowledge that a low dose exposure to blue asbestos could cause mesothelioma? A. Yes. Q. That would be some years later would it doctor? A. I couldn't say precisely when but it became apparent when cases of mesothelioma were arising where the patient had not been a miner or a miller, but had simply handled asbestos in other ways - laggers and so forth. Q. So we are looking at what - some time in the early 70s doctor? A. Couldn't say. Probably the late 60s". (emphasis supplied) At 4167 he said that the medical community in Australia accepted the association between asbestos exposure and mesothelioma after McNulty's article in 1962. Dr Kilpatrick said (3529), "... in 1960 this paper was published and then nothing seems to have happened much except the few other miscellaneous papers. Then (19)65 there was Muriel Newhouse's paper in the British Journal of Industrial Medicine and then the Conference and dozens of papers with lots of people then saying 'Look obviously it's more dangerous than you thought it was'." Dreesen, and its tentative recommendation that industrial dust containing asbestos should be kept below 5 million particles per cubic foot, was for a long time the accepted, albeit informal, industrial safety standard in this country. It was adopted by the National Health and Medical Research Council in 1957 and remained its standard until 1970 (908, 3800). Professor Ferguson said it was the general standard in 1961 BC9800336 at 23 (901) used for example by the New South Wales Government (910). Dr Joseph agreed (3463-4, 4187-8), as did Dr Kilpatrick, who said that the standard "was accepted fairly wholeheartedly for the next 25 years" (3481) until the mid 1960s (3525). The statement by the trial Judge that Dreesen did not establish a standard (4292) does not accord with the evidence. Professor Ferguson thought that the asbestos exposure referred to in Wagner, and in Dr McNulty's article in 1962, was "potentially heavy (856-7) and not transitory (831). The exposure of the mill worker referred to by Dr McNulty would have been hundreds of times greater than any neighbourhood or bystander exposure (831), and "far greater" than that experienced by Mrs Olson as a child (832). In 1961 asbestos dust was known to be dangerous and toxic if inhaled in sufficient quantities over a sufficient length of time (848, 889, 4113) and as Giles AJA points out, in 1959-1961 it was simply not known what was a "safe" dose. Nevertheless this was not a new industry or a small one, and the Dreesen standard occupied the field. The risks of asbestosis and its complication, cancer of the lung, were well known, although unfortunately largely ignored in the operations at the Wittenoom mine and mill. It has not been suggested (even now) that there was ever any risk that Mrs Olson, and persons like her, could contract asbestosis (or any other pulmonary disease except mesothelioma) from environmental exposure at Wittenoom. Dr McNulty knew of no case of asbestosis in the BC9800336 at 24 town in 1961 (215). Professor Ferguson said that at the end of 1961, he would not have been concerned that persons in the town like Mrs Olson would contract an asbestos-related disease (921, 927, 935). He added, "At that time I am sure the only disease that would have been in question in the mind of (persons) having to make an opinion about that, would have been asbestosis, and of course asbestosis wasn't in question at all in those circumstances" (836). The risks from dust in the open air are much less than those in confined spaces (Professor Ferguson, 928; Dr Joseph, 4159). Castleman said that there was "nothing" to warn of the risk of mesothelioma from environmental exposure before Wagner (397-8), although the risk of contracting asbestosis from gross environmental exposure was known (354-5). Dr Joseph was asked what advice he would have given about exposure to blue asbestos in 1962 after reading Wagner and McNulty and he said: "As I have a conservative approach to these things ... I think I would have advised that there is evidence that exposure to asbestos, blue asbestos at that time, of a relatively small degree, would ultimately lead to mesothelioma, and therefore it would be prudent to protect people from the possible inhalation of blue asbestos. But as I have said before, it is very difficult to know precisely what you would have done 30 years ago" (4205). Even that evidence related to the position after the McNulty article at the end of 1962. The doctor's hesitation points up the difficulty that courts should have in reaching positive conclusions in the 90s that independent experts did not reach at the time. BC9800336 at 25 The trial Judge concluded that dust was frequently visible in the air in the town and he was satisfied that its concentration was heavy (4287). He said that the tailings created daily "a blue haze in the town" (4306). Mr Simcock gave evidence that one could see from the airport, which was about a mile away, that the town was covered with a grey smoke haze (4285), but he did not describe it as blue. The descriptions of dust in the homes indicate that there was a lot of dust in the atmosphere, and Dr McNulty said that the town was always dusty except in the wet season (240), but Mr Simcock was the only witness of the many who had been at Wittenoom who gave evidence of a haze across the town visible from the airport, and no witness said that there was daily a blue haze in the town. Dr McNulty referred in August 1961 to "the pretty but lethal blue haze" around the mine and mill but, contrary to the statement of the trial Judge at 4286, he did not use this description for the atmosphere in the town (222), and he never said that the atmosphere there was the same as at the mine and mill (216). He said that dust raised from the roads in the town was never a concern to his mind in 1959 or 1960 apart from its cumulative effect on persons working at the mine or mill (214, 217). As a result of my review of the evidence, I am unable to accept the trial Judge's finding at 4302, "The evidence satisfies me that dust in significant and dangerous concentrations was present continually in the township ...", or his finding at 4306, "In my view it should at all times have been known to the defendant that tailings were dangerous. In my BC9800336 at 26 view tailings should never have been placed in the town. But they were ... in such quantities ... to create daily a blue haze in the town ...". Although Dr McNulty described the town as dusty, it obviously never occurred to him that the dust levels exceeded the Dreesen standard with any regularity because it did not occur to him that the inhabitants of the town were at any risk of contracting asbestosis. There is no evidence that any of the inhabitants, other than those who worked at the mine or the mill, contracted asbestosis. My analysis of the evidence, and my conclusion that the dust levels in the town did not exceed the Dreesen standard with sufficient frequency to create a foreseeable risk of injury from asbestosis, compel me to dissent from the findings of the trial Judge that the dust levels in the town constituted a risk of foreseeable injury (4302), that during the time the plaintiff's family lived there the defendants knew, or ought to have known, of the dangers of exposing the townspeople to asbestos dust (4305), and that the daily blue haze in the town was capable of causing an injury which was then foreseeable (4306). The test of reasonable foresight established by Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963] AC 837, The "Wagon Mound" [No 2] [1967] 1 AC 617 and Wyong Shire Council v Shirt (1980) 146 CLR 40, ensures that freak or unusual accidents are within the foresight of the ordinary reasonable man. Those cases were not concerned with reasonable foresight of dangerous properties of articles of commerce beyond the limits of current scientific knowledge. BC9800336 at 27 In my opinion the position in the present case is quite different from that where a new, or little known substance, such as thalidomide, is introduced into the market. The situation in that type of case was considered in Vacwell Engineering Co Ltd v BDH Chemicals [1971] 1 QB 88 where boron tribromide, sold by the defendant without any warning as to its explosive properties on contact with water, caused a major explosion at the plaintiff's factory. This was a property of the chemical known since 1878 and three technical books in the defendant's library, which they did not consult, contained warnings to this effect (98), although others which they consulted did not. Rees J said at 99-100: "... it was the duty of BDH to have established and maintained a system under which adequate investigation and research into the scientific literature took place in order to discover ... what hazards were known before a new or little known chemical was marketed ... I am satisfied that there was a breach of duty of care and skill on the part of those responsible ... to carry out an adequate and proper research into the scientific literature". (emphasis supplied) The leading case on liability in negligence for damage caused by an unknown property of a known substance is The Wagon Mound [No 1] [1961] AC 388. The critical finding of fact by the trial Judge was that "the defendant did not know and could not reasonably be expected to have known that furnace oil was capable of being set afire when spread on water" (413). The Privy Council held at 426: "... the essential factor in determining liability is whether the damage is of such a kind as the reasonable man should have foreseen ... It is a departure from this sovereign principle if liability is made to depend solely on the damage being the BC9800336 at 28 'direct' or 'natural' consequence of the precedent act. Who knows or can be assumed to know all the processes of nature? But if it would be wrong that a man should be held liable for damage unpredictable by a reasonable man because it was 'direct' or 'natural', equally it would be wrong that he should escape liability, however 'indirect' the damage, if he foresaw or could reasonably foresee the intervening events which led to its being done". A different finding of fact was made in The Wagon Mound [No 2], but this does not diminish the force of the foregoing reasoning. Another case involving physical injury caused by an unknown and unsuspected property of a known substance, coincidentally asbestos, is Doughty v Turner Manufacturing Co Ltd [1964] 1 QB 518. An asbestos cement cover, purchased from reputable manufacturers, was placed on top of a cauldron containing a molten liquid heated to 800°C. The cover was knocked into the liquid and exploded splashing the plaintiff. The trial Judge found that, in the state of knowledge at the time of the accident, the defendants could not reasonably have foreseen that the immersion of the cover in the liquid would be likely to injure anyone (531). Lord Pearce said at 526: "... the potential eruptive qualities of the covers when immersed in great heat were not suspected and they were not a known source of danger". Diplock LJ referred to the fact that the cover was designed for use with the furnace, and had been widely used in the trade for upwards of 20 years (529), and Lord Pearce cited the statement by Viscount Simonds in The Wagon Mound [No 1] [1961] AC 388 at 424: BC9800336 at 29 "After the event even a fool is wise. But it is not the hindsight of a fool; it is the foresight of the reasonable man which alone can determine responsibility". The defendants' appeal was allowed on the ground that the injury was not reasonably foreseeable. Another case to the same effect is The Grandcamp [1961] 1 Lloyd's Rep 504 (Court of Appeals, 5th Circuit), which arose from the Texas City disaster in 1947 when the devastating effects of the explosion of a cargo of ammonium nitrate, a fertiliser, "shocked and surprised the scientific field as well as the transportation industry" (508). The ship and its owners were held not liable for the consequences of the explosion which could not reasonably have been foreseen in the light of the knowledge available at the time. There is also a further question. In Wyong Shire Council v Shirt, Mason J said, at 47-8: "In deciding whether there has been a breach of the duty of care the tribunal of fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable man in the defendant's position would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of injury to the plaintiff or to a class of persons including the plaintiff. If the answer be in the affirmative it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine what a reasonable man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude of risk and the degree of the probability of its occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating action and any other conflicting responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these matters are balanced out that the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the defendant's position". BC9800336 at 30 Similar considerations were referred to in The Wagon Mound [No 2] at 643-4, where Lord Reid said: "If a real risk is one which would occur to the mind of a reasonable man in the position of the (defendant) and which he would not brush aside as far-fetched, and if the criterion is to be what that reasonable man would have done in the circumstances, then surely he would not neglect such a risk if action to eliminate it presented no difficulty, involved no disadvantage, and required no expense". The trial Judge considered that a suitable warning to Mrs Olson's parents would have satisfied the companies' duties of care, but I cannot agree. Understandably in the circumstances the plaintiff did not attempt to establish causation on any other basis. In my judgment, the only warning likely to have influenced the behaviour of her parents would been one framed in strong terms. The environmental hazard, as we now know, was such that the only effective action was to leave the town, and in hindsight a warning to do this, or a strong warning amounting to the same thing, would have been justified. However I cannot accept that such a warning was required by the scientific and medical knowledge available in this country before December 1961. Such a warning may have brought about the closing of the mill and destroyed the business of ABA and the town. It cannot be said that the giving of such a warning, with those consequences, "presented no difficulty, involved no disadvantage and required no expense". BC9800336 at 31 Unfortunately the tort of negligence is the only means by which industries can be compelled to bear the financial consequences of injuries suffered by persons like Mrs Olson. The Judge did not find in terms that the risk of contracting mesothelioma from purely environmental exposure was reasonably foreseeable at any particular time prior to the beginning of December 1961. I accept the contemporary view of Dr McNulty that the tailings in the town created a risk of injury to persons who were exposed to dust at work, because of the cumulative effect of the additional exposure outside working hours, and I also accept that this risk was foreseeable throughout the relevant period. However the evidence does not support a finding that any risk to persons such as the plaintiff was reasonably foreseeable during that period. The duty owed by the companies to their workers, and its breach, cannot assist the plaintiff who must establish that she was owed a duty of care because injury to her was reasonably foreseeable. See Bourhill v Young [1943] AC 92 at 113 per Lord Porter. The decisions in Margerson v J W Roberts Ltd (Holland J, QBD, 27/10/95, u/r and CA 2/4/96 u/r) are not relevant in this case. Workers in the defendants' factory at Leeds were exposed to excessive concentrations of asbestos dust and visible dust was exhausted from the factory to the atmosphere, or escaped through open windows, doors and ventilation devices (18). Children from the neighbourhood played on bales of asbestos in the open loading bays in dusty conditions. Holland J held that the foresight of injury from dust did not cease at the factory walls (44-5). He BC9800336 at 32 said that the defendants, in 1933, the relevant date in that case (49), were bound to foresee a risk of personal injury to outsiders such as the plaintiffs from the inhalation of asbestos dust (46), "... in that the conditions to which each was respectively exposed ... (and potentially for longer than, say, 40 hours per week), approximated to those within (the) factory, which conditions raised notorious risk of potential injury ...". The Judge continued (46): "I readily accept that as a general proposition injury to health was not then to be anticipated from environmental exposure outside the confines of workroom: what I reject is the proposition that all exposure outside this factory could (be) categorised as 'environmental', something contrasting with, and markedly less potentially hazardous, than exposure within the factory. I have no doubt but that, in the immediate vicinity of the defendants' premises, factory conditions in terms of dust emission were at various points effectively replicated so as to give rise to like foresight of potential injury to those exposed for prolonged periods". He referred to the risk of personal injury from inhaling asbestos dust rather than asbestosis, because he was "quite satisfied that the general hazards attributed to dust inhalation over a long period as described earlier in this judgment could not reasonably be excluded as potential consequences given the amount, nature and sighting of the dust". Those general hazards, referred to in the Merewether report, included pulmonary and bronchial catarrh, asthma, bronchitis, fibrosis of the lungs, and secondary change such as emphysema, local or defuse, increased susceptibility to the supervention of respiratory infections, such as tuberculosis or pneumonia (35), and childhood asthma (48). BC9800336 at 33 This decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal. Russell LJ delivering the judgment of the Court said, at 6: "... in the context of this case we take the view that liability only attached to these Defendants if the evidence demonstrated that they should reasonably have foreseen a risk of some pulmonary injury, not necessarily mesothelioma". The appeal failed because the Court endorsed the trial Judge's rejection of any distinction between the duty owed to employees within the factory, and that owed to the children playing outside (9-10). The defendants were held liable for environmental exposure which could not be distinguished from industrial exposure. In my judgment this decision is of no assistance where, as in this case, the environmental exposure was not proximate to and did not approximate the industrial exposure, and there was no evidence of a foreseeable risk of pulmonary injury. The trial Judge found that mesothelioma was an injury of the same kind as asbestosis and lung cancer. See generally Commonwealth v McLean (1996) 41 NSWLR 389 at 403-7. I have doubts about this, but the question does not arise because in my opinion there was no foreseeable risk of any pulmonary injury to the residents of the town. The High Court granted Special Leave to appeal from the Queensland Court of Appeal in Bale v Seltsam Pty Ltd (21/2/96). I have carefully considered the decisions of White J (14/12/95, u/r) and the Queensland Court of Appeal (23/8/96, u/r) and the transcript of argument on the leave application. In the end I have concluded that, in the state of BC9800336 at 34 medical and scientific knowledge in this country in December 1961 and earlier, there was no foreseeable risk that purely environmental exposure to asbestos in Wittenoom would cause any pulmonary injury. Asbestos was then an established article of commerce and had been for many years. No death from mesothelioma linked with asbestos exposure had been reported outside South Africa. (I have not overlooked the tentative sentence in the April 1960 report.) Dr McNulty's references to the world literature in his letters of 17 March 1960 and 16 March 1961 demonstrate that definite conclusions were not justified at that stage. Dr McNulty drew attention to the risk to workers from mesothelioma during the meeting on 10 October 1961, but said nothing about the risk from purely environmental exposure. On 18 September 1961 he wrote to Dr Rennie referring to his "suspicion" that purely environmental exposure "may" be dangerous. Although his suspicion was later vindicated, I cannot accept that the law requires the owner of an established business, producing a product in general use, to act on "a suspicion". Even Dr Kilpatrick was only prepared to say that when Wagner appeared it "might have made some people think" (3529). I cannot accept that the owner of such a business was bound, in the then state of knowledge, to give a strong and unqualified warning to the residents of Wittenoom. Any warning that referred to the doubts and contained the qualifications justified by the state of knowledge at that time would have been useless. It is highly unlikely that a qualified warning of that kind would have accelerated the departure of the Olsons, BC9800336 at 35 who left for other reasons after one month's notice in the first days of December 1961. It has not been suggested that further research could have been undertaken in 1960-1 which would have confirmed or disproved the causal link between mesothelioma and exposure to blue asbestos. Business must not gamble with human life or health for the sake of the bottom line, but in my opinion the law of negligence has not yet reached the stage where an established industry has to be closed down on mere suspicion. The medical and scientific literature may contain many false alarms as well as false hopes of miracle cures that later came to nothing. It would not have been unreasonable for the companies to wait to see whether Wagner was a false alarm. One cannot but have tremendous sympathy for Mrs Olson who contracted a terrible disease without any fault of hers, or of her parents, but such feelings form no part of the established principles of the law of negligence. Compare E v Australian Red Cross Society (1991) 31 FCR 299. I cannot part from this case without paying tribute to the trial Judge who delivered a long, carefully structured, extempore judgment at the conclusion of a long and hard fought trial, conducted during extended hours up to six days a week. In my judgment the appeal should be allowed and judgment entered in the action for the defendants. However, since mine is a minority view, I agree with the orders proposed by Giles AJA.

## Giles AJA

BC9800336 at 1 Colonial Sugar Refining Company Ltd (now CSR Ltd) (CSR) acquired rights to mine deposits of blue asbestos (crocidolite) in and near Wittenoom Gorge in the Hammersley Ranges in Western Australia. Australian Blue Asbestos Ltd (later Australian Blue Asbestos Pty Ltd and now Midalco Pty Ltd) (ABA) was incorporated to mine the asbestos. Mining operations began with the Wittenoom Mine in Wittenoom Gorge in the early 1940s, and were transferred to the Colonial Mine in the Colonial Gorge in 1958. At each mine a mill was set up to crush the rock bearing the asbestos fibre, and after extraction of the asbestos the tailings were in the main BC9800336 at 2 dumped at the mine site. The town of Wittenoom was established about thirteen kilometres from the mines. Mr Vincent Olson was engaged by ABA as a craftsman at the office complex in Wittenoom Gorge, and took up residence in Wittenoom with his wife and daughter in May 1959. A second daughter, Vivien, was born at the Wittenoom Town Hospital in September 1959. The family left Wittenoom at the end of 1961. During her short time at Wittenoom, from birth to the age of about 27 months, Vivien was exposed to blue asbestos. Tailings were been used to form roads at the mines and in the town, in some places sealed but not on the shoulders; to construct the airport a short distance to the north of the town; to surface the racecourse just outside the town; and to surround the greens on the golf course just outside the town. Tailings were used as fill or ground cover near the hospital and the school, in the yards of many houses, and generally throughout the town. The Olson back yard and surroundings where the children played were spread with tailings. The tailings contained about 2 per cent of asbestos fibre, and were described as fluffy and readily sending up puffs of dust. Mr Olson came home from the office complex with asbestos fibres on his clothes from the dusty conditions there, and dust was generated in the town by vehicles, by pedestrian movement, and by wind. From a distance there was a blue-grey haze over the town from the dust containing asbestos fibres, which caught on flyscreens and invaded homes so as to require frequent sweeping. Even as a babe in arms Vivien inhaled asbestos fibres from her father's clothes and from the environment, and as she crawled and began to walk her exposure increased. She BC9800336 at 3 played "mostly" on the verandah of her home, but her exposure included exposure from playing in tailings in the back yard and elsewhere in the town. Vivian grew up, married, and had children. In April 1994 the then Mrs Vivien Olson (she retained her maiden name), aged 34, was diagnosed as suffering from mesothelioma, a malignant condition caused by the inhalation of blue asbestos but with a long latency period. It was found in the proceedings next mentioned that Mrs Olson had no other relevant exposure to asbestos, and that she contracted mesothelioma as a result of inhaling asbestos fibres while at Wittenoom. Mrs Olson died of the disease in January 1995. Mrs Olson brought proceedings against CSR and ABA in the Dust Diseases Tribunal (Judge O'Meally). The defendants contended that neither was liable, and CSR contended that it was not liable even if ABA was liable. It was held that both defendants owed a duty of care to Mrs Olson, that both were in breach of that duty, and that she was entitled to damages of $823,594. The reasoning to the conclusion on liability was -

(a) the relationship between CSR and ABA was such that, whatever may have been ABA's duties and responsibilities to employees and to residents of the town of Wittenoom, CSR had co-extensive duties and responsibilities;

(b) the co-extensive duties and responsibilities, by concession including a duty of care for the safety of the work force employed at the mines and in the mills, extended to a duty of care owed to residents of the town of Wittenoom;

BC9800336 at 4

(c) the duty of care was breached at least by failure to warn Mrs Olson's mother that she and her family were at risk of injury; and

(d) the breach of duty caused Mrs Olson's loss because if the warning had been given the family would not have remained at Wittenoom.

The reasons of Judge O'Meally were lengthy, but there can usefully be set out what he said as some of his ultimate conclusions in relation to liability - "I am satisfied that the defendants owed to the plaintiff and to other residents of the town, the ordinary common law duty of care, namely to safeguard them against the risks of foreseeable injury. It is argued here that the defendants failed to do what was reasonable, that is to warn the plaintiff's mother that she and her family were at risk of injury. The evidence of Mrs Pedlar, the plaintiff's mother is, that had she known of the dangers of the surroundings, and the circumstances in which her children played, or had she been warned of them, she would not have stayed in the town. This is credible evidence. ... I am satisfied that during the whole of the time the plaintiff's family lived in Wittenoom, the defendants knew or ought to have known of the dangers of exposing the townspeople to asbestos dust. If they were ignorant of the dangers, a fact which I very much doubt, there was no excuse for their ignorance. CSR as a large and multi-faceted corporation, had an obligation, not merely to acquaint itself with what was in the literature, but to seek out information before engaging in an enterprise which was known to carry risks. It was not sufficient that it and ABA wait for information to be conveyed to them. They had a positive obligation to seek out information and acquire knowledge and direct and modify operations and conduct to accord with safe practices. ... It has been argued that the plaintiff has not demonstrated when it was that the tailings in which she played were taken to the town; and that if they were put there from its inception, and they were the offending fibres, then no knowledge in the defendants can be found to exist at the time the tailings were put there. BC9800336 at 5 In my view, it should at all times have been known to the defendants that tailings were dangerous. In my view tailings should never have been placed in the town. But they were placed and continued to be placed there in such quantities as, during the plaintiff's residency, to create daily a blue haze in the town, which were capable of causing a foreseeable injury. The plaintiff has proved that it was reasonably foreseeable as a possibility that the kind of carelessness charged against the defendants might cause damage of some kind to her .... I am satisfied that the defendants and each of them, owed a duty of care to the plaintiff, that they failed to observe that duty of care; that as a result, the plaintiff was injured and that the risk of her injury was, at all times that the defendants were operating their enterprise, foreseeable." CSR and ABA appealed. No less than seventy-seven grounds of appeal were set out in the notice of appeal. The submissions in support of the appeal did not identifiably follow the grounds of appeal, and in these reasons I have gone to what I believe to be the substance of the grounds of appeal. The appeal was heard in December 1996, with supplementary written submissions in early 1997. Judgment was deferred because on 2 December 1996 the High Court granted special leave to appeal from the decision of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Queensland in Bale v Seltsam Pty Ltd (23 August 1996, unreported), a case concerned with the duty of care in broadly similar circumstances. The High Court appeal was subsequently discontinued. CSR's position CSR submitted that if a duty of care was owed to Mrs Olson it was owed only by ABA, not by CSR. It was said that the operation of the mines was carried out by ABA, with its own board, management, assets, and decision-making structure, that there was no evidence on which it could be concluded that CSR so directed and BC9800336 at 6 controlled ABA that CSR came under a duty of care to the plaintiff, and in particular that the distribution of tailings throughout the town of Wittenoom was not shown to have been or involved the act of any officer or agent of CSR as distinct from ABA. ABA was incorporated on 6 April 1943. CSR held all issued shares except a few issued to the directors of ABA, they also being directors or senior officers of CSR. On 23 June 1943 an agreement was entered into by which ABA appointed CSR "to Act as its Managing Agent and Sole Distributor with full and absolute authority to do all things necessary for the proper management and control of the business and undertaking of [ABA]". The agreement was to operate for five years and thereafter from year to year until terminated on notice, and there was no evidence of termination. CSR's shareholding domination remained at all times, as did the identity of officers of CSR with directors of ABA, and amongst the matters recited by Judge O'Meally were references in CSR's annual reports to CSR's activities in connection with "our mine in Western Australia". CSR's board minutes contained frequent consideration of even day to day operations at Wittenoom, and when operations at Wittenoom ceased it was pursuant to a resolution of CSR's board. His Honour concluded that CSR's influence over and power to control ABA were such that CSR was virtually indistinguishable from ABA and directed and controlled ABA. Hence his Honour accepted that CSR so controlled the activities of ABA as to be responsible in law for its negligent acts and omissions. It was conceded by CSR that it, as well as ABA, owed a duty of care to the workers at the mines and in the mills. It sought to distinguish between the operation BC9800336 at 7 of the mines and the mills, on the one hand, and anything bearing upon a duty of care owed to the residents of Wittenoom, on the other hand. The distinction can not stand with the agreement of 23 June 1943, or with the other matters to which his Honour referred. It can readily be seen that, notwithstanding the separate existence of ABA, for the purposes of liability to the workers at the mines and in the mills the reality was that CSR was itself conducting the operations, through ABA: it conducted the operations by establishing a wholly owned subsidiary and causing the wholly owned subsidiary to give it comprehensive powers as agent. There is no reason to distinguish in this regard between the operations at the mines and in the mills and other activities the responsibility for which is said to fall upon ABA alone, most relevantly the distribution of tailings throughout the town of Wittenoom and the failure to warn of the risk they posed. The reality is still that CSR was engaged in the relevant acts and omissions, through ABA. On the facts as found, in my view Judge O'Meally was correct in concluding that CSR owed to the townspeople a duty of care co-extensive with that owed by ABA. CSR did not cite any authority in support of its submission, nor did Mrs Olson cite any authority in opposition thereto. Some mention was made of "piercing the corporate veil", and of CSR being vicariously liable for a wrong of ABA, but there was no development of these matters as a basis for CSR's co-extensive duty. The question in a case such as the present is whether the dominant parent in all the circumstances, including that the dominance may have been such that the subsidiary was in truth "merely' a conduit for the parent", see Craig v Lake Asbestos of Quebec BC9800336 at 8 843 F 2d 145 (1988), was in a relationship of proximity to the injured party. If it was, there is no question of piercing the corporate veil, a notion discussed in some detail by Rogers AJA in Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd (1989) 16 NSWLR 549 at 567-581: as his Honour pointed out (at 578-9), the tests of the kind extracted in Smith Stone & Knight Ltd v Birmingham Corporation (1939) 4 All ER 116 are inappropriate to actions in negligence. There is also no question of vicarious liability, and the considerations such as those on which CSR relied for the submission presently under consideration do not exclude the duty of care. The duty of care In many situations foreseeability is an influential, if not decisive, determinant of the existence of a relationship of proximity, and this is such a situation: if physical injury to a class of persons of which Mrs Olson was one might reasonably have been foreseen as a possible consequence of the acts or omissions of CSR and ABA in connection with exposure to blue asbestos, there is likely to have been proximity and a duty of care (Jaensch v Coffey (1984) 155 CLR 549 at 584-5; Gala v Preston (1991) 172 CLR 243 at 253; Nagle v Rottnest Island Authority (1993) 177 CLR 423 at 430). The parties so conducted the proceedings, directing particular attention to whether the state of knowledge of the effects of blue asbestos in 1959-1961 was such that, while it was recognised as dangerous to workers at the mines and in the mills at concentrations which could there be encountered, no danger was recognised in what might be called external exposure such as from residence in the vicinity of the mines and mills, transmission of asbestos fibres on clothes, or the prevalence of tailings in BC9800336 at 9 the manner in which they were present at Wittenoom. CSR and ABA stated that it was conceded that ABA owed a duty of care to residents of the town of Wittenoom, at least to those who worked at the mines or in the mills, but effectively nullified the concession by not conceding "that there was reasonable foreseeability of the risks we are concerned with in this case". Not for the only time in the appeal, there was some obscurity in their position, and in the end I understand them to have submitted first that the state of knowledge was against foreseeability of any relevant risk, and secondly that in any event scientific knowledge was of the risk of asbestosis and bronchogenic carcinoma rather than the different risk of mesothelioma. Foreseeability must, of course, be judged according to circumstances as at 1959-1961, excluding the advantages of hindsight. The requisite foreseeability is not high. In the well-known statements of Mason J (with whom Stephen and Aicken JJ agreed) in Wyong Shire Council v Shirt (1980) 146 CLR 40 at 47-48 - "A risk of injury which is quite unlikely to occur ... may nevertheless be plainly foreseeable. Consequently, when we speak of a risk of injury as being 'foreseeable' we are not making any statement as to the probability or improbability of its occurrence, save that we are implicitly asserting that the risk is not one that is far-fetched or fanciful. Although it is true to say that in many cases the greater the degree of probability of the occurrence of the risk the more readily it will be perceived to be a risk, it certainly does not follow that a risk which is unlikely to occur is not foreseeable. … The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely to occur may nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not far-fetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable." BC9800336 at 10 It was well-known before 1959 that blue asbestos was a dangerous substance in that inhalation of asbestos fibres could cause asbestosis and bronochogenic carcinoma. Contraction of the diseases was thought to be "dose related", the dosage being a function of both concentration of asbestos fibres and time of exposure. In 1938 the so-called "Dreesen standard" of exposure to 5 million particles per cubic foot was put forward, but Dreesen himself stated that this was not a safe limit and instanced cases of exposure below that limit; he described the exposure as one "which may be regarded tentatively as the threshold value for asbestos-dust exposure until better data are available". The literature included other instances of contraction of the diseases absent prolonged exposure at such concentration; for example, the 1930 Report on Effects of Asbestos Dust in the Lungs and the 1955 article by Doll. The 1960 article by Wagner and others brought to prominence diseases in persons living in the vicinity of asbestos mines, but as at 1959-61 it was simply not known what was a "safe " dosage. So, for example, in a 1952 publication of the Department of Health it was said only that it "may be doubted whether any dust, provided the exposure is sufficient, can be regarded as harmless" (the dusts included asbestos), in 1958 Cooper stated that the maximum permissible concentration was 2.5 million particles per cubic foot (Dr Cooper was the Medical Director of General Motors-Holden's Ltd and published in Australian Factory), and a 1960 article in the British Medical Journal included, "Nevertheless, asbestos dust is most toxic and the amount needed to cause asbestosis is not known, so constant vigilance and new preventive methods are needed if this disease is to be abolished" [emphasis added]. Brief but intense BC9800336 at 11 exposure resulting in asbestosis was reported in 1934, and asbestosis in "bystanders" such as clerical workers in asbestos plants was recognised in the same period. In and from 1959 CSR and ABA knew that blue asbestos was dangerous to workers at the mines and in the mills. They knew of the usage and presence of tailings containing asbestos fibre in Wittenoom. They knew that there was no known safe dosage and that exposure in the town was a risk to health, if for no other reason because Dr McNulty told them so. Dr James McNulty was a chest physician employed by the Public Health Department of Western Australia and based in Kalgoorlie. His responsibilities included the well-being of miners in the State, and he visited the mines and mills at Wittenoom to monitor the operations there conducted. One of his visits was in 1959, and he wrote to Mr Ossie Allan, the Manager of ABA, on 4 December 1959 referring to suspected industrial chest disease in workers at the new mill and to "a particular problem and a particular hazard which has not yet been fully investigated or remedied". He meant that he was unsure what dust level might be safe, and told Mr Allan so, saying that he thought it was unfortunate that people who worked in the mine and in the mill, who were exposed to so much dust at work, should also have to face it at home and at recreation, and that he thought it was a bad thing. As well, the 1960 article in the British Medical Journal was held by ABA, and was sent by Mr Allan to ABA's Sydney offices by a letter dated 24 June 1960. It follows, in my view, that in and from 1959 it was foreseeable to CSR and ABA, in the sense that there was a risk which was not far-fetched or fanciful, that BC9800336 at 12 residents of Wittenoom could be exposed to blue asbestos in concentrations and for periods of time sufficient for them to contract asbestosis or bronchogenic carcinoma. The foreseeable risk could not be put aside on the ground, for example, that the concentration was much less than that recognised as dangerous to workers at the mines and in the mills, because in some circumstances there could be prolonged exposure to low concentrations of asbestos fibres such as from the dust generated by vehicles, pedestrian movement and wind, and in other circumstances there could be highly concentrated exposure albeit for relatively short periods. It takes little imagination to see the concentrated exposure from children playing in tailings, as they did and Mrs Olson must have done although for a relatively short period. (It also takes little imagination to see the concentrated exposure of participants in so-called "bogging competitions" held in the town, races to fill 44 gallon drums with tailings by shovelling: an incautious breath would mean inhalation of many years worth of high concentration of particles, although of course the period of concentrated exposure would be short). In my view the detailed analysis of the medical and industrial safety literature and the state of knowledge of the effects of blue asbestos in 1959-1961 undertaken before Judge O'Meally and to some extent on appeal need not be recounted. Even if the literature had not definitely established that what I have called external exposure caused asbestosis or bronchogenic carcinoma, the risk from exposure of the kind in Wittenoom, with the nature and extent of the use of tailings (to which may be added the asbestos fibres borne on clothes) earlier described, was foreseeable. BC9800336 at 13 That there was foreseeable risk is supported, albeit by later events, by Dr McNulty's reaction to the diagnosis of mesothelioma in Mr Allan towards the end of 1960. He said that he developed "a growing conviction that the introduction of tailings to the town in fact brought the mine to the town instead of the other way around". By a letter dated 18 September 1961 he wrote to Dr Rennie, a thoracic physician who acted as a consultant to CSR - "Dry ore residue is dumped a few hundred yards from the main workings, and in a breeze blows all over the place. Even in the township much of the road and path surfacing is made of waste material from the mine, and blue asbestos fibres are obvious. ... [After discussion of conditions at the mine] No one connected with the problem should wait until conditions at Wittenoom are ideal and the foregoing does not suggest that this stage has been realised. The known hazard is real enough but reading papers on pleural mesothelioma (notably J C Wagner and others, British Journal of Industrial Medicine 1960 17-260) one is left with a suspicion that a combination of individual idiocyncrasy and minimal asbestos exposure such as from road surfacing, may be dangerous." Dr Rennie himself came to the view during communications with Dr McNulty that people in the town were at risk from exposure to asbestos dust. At a meeting in October 1961 attended by Mr Allan and Mr Thomas, ABA's personnel officer, Dr McNulty distributed a report expressing concern that cancers of the pleura reported from South Africa (it seems having in mind the 1960 article by Wagner and others) were due to "individual susceptibility and a minimal exposure to blue asbestos - crocidolite". Dr McNulty expressed the same views to management at the mine, and in 1962 reiterated concern that tailings had been used for roads and paths and as fill on the golf course. All this shows that the risk was there to be seen, and so was foreseeable, in and from 1959. BC9800336 at 14 I do not think that CSR and ABA are assisted by Dr McNulty's agreement that "contracting an asbestos disease ... by exposure to small doses and bystanders" was not foreseeable by him until the early 1960s, since Dr McNulty clearly enough distinguished between transient exposure (which he defined as "uncommonly short exposure compared to exposure of other casualties") and long term low level exposure - a distinction which no doubt underlay his referring to working in the town as distinct from in the mills as "a lesser risk substituted for a major one". The exposure to which residents of Wittenoom were subjected was more than transient exposure. CSR and ABA relied particularly on the evidence of Emeritus Professor David Ferguson, which included the opinion - "From the above it is clear that during the period 1959 to 1961 no one could have foreseen that the plaintiff may have been at risk of contracting mesothelioma. Although knowledge of asbestosis had been accumulating from [sic] most of this century, the circumstances of the exposure of the plaintiff to asbestos at Wittenoom as described, were such that no one would have considered her to be at risk of asbestosis, asbestos-related lung cancer or other asbestos-related disease." Judge O'Meally paid regard to Professor Ferguson's opinion, but also to Professor Ferguson's acceptance of the general principle that exposure should be reduced not just below a putative safe limit but also to a level which is as low as reasonably attainable. He found nonetheless that there was a foreseeable risk of injury to residents of the town of Wittenoom. For the reasons I have given, I also consider that there was a foreseeable risk of injury. As earlier noted, CSR and ABA submitted that any foreseeable risk was a risk of asbestosis or bronchogenic carcinoma, not what was said to be the different risk of BC9800336 at 15 mesothelioma. It is not necessary that the precise risk of injury in fact suffered be foreseeable, see Windeyer J in Mt Isa Mines Ltd v Pusey (1970) 125 CLR 383 at 402 - "Foreseeability does not mean foresight of the particular course of events causing the harm. Nor does it suppose foresight of the particular harm which occurred, but only of some harm of a like kind." There was evidence before Judge O'Meally directed to characterising the similarities and differences between the diseases. The parties' submissions included listing the suggested similarities and differences between asbestosis and bronchogenic carcinoma, on the one hand, and mesothelioma, on the other hand, with a view to assessment of whether harm from contracting the latter disease was of a like kind to harm from contracting the former diseases. The assessment will depend on the level of detail at which the similarities and differences are extracted. In my opinion the level of detail to which CSR and ABA descended in this exercise was inappropriate. Each of the diseases is contracted as a result of inhaling asbestos fibres, each affects the lungs although the pathological identifications of the diseases differ, and although there may be in general differences in the requisite levels of exposure the danger in exposure to blue asbestos is relevantly the same whether the actual effect is asbestosis, bronchogenic carcinoma, or mesothelioma. The duty of care because of the risk of contracting asbestosis or bronchogenic carcinoma flowed from it being a dangerous substance, it was sufficient for a duty of care that it was foreseeable that the inhalation of asbestos fibres could cause an injury of that kind, and in my opinion mesothelioma was injury of like kind. Rowland J held to the same effect in Heys and BC9800336 at 16 Barrow v CSR Ltd (Supreme Court of Western Australia, 4 August 1988, unreported), and since the hearing of this appeal this Court has so held in Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes (CA, 29 July 1997, unreported). As was said in the last mentioned case by Beazley JA, with whom Mason P and Stein JA relevantly agreed - "Whilst these concessions did not specifically relate to chrysotile, it was not necessary in my opinion, for the respondent to establish that it was foreseeable that exposure to a particular type of asbestos could cause injury. At the relevant time it was known that asbestos, as a generic substance, was hazardous. Nor was it necessary for Mr Barnes to prove that it was foreseeable that he could contract the particular injury of mesothelioma. It was sufficient that it was foreseeable that the inhalation of asbestos could cause an injury of the kind which he suffered: Mount Isa Mines Ltd v Pusey (1970) 125 CLR 383: Beavis v Apthorpe (1962) 80 WN(NSW) 852; Commonwealth of Australia v McLean (unreported NSW Court of Appeal 31 December 1996)." It may be added that a similar position obtains in England, see Margerson v J W Roberts Ltd (Holland J, 27 October 1995; CA, 2 April 1996; both unreported). In Bale v Seltsam Pty Ltd the plaintiff had been exposed to asbestos from June 1962. The majority, McPherson JA and Helman J, considered that, on the evidence, at the relevant time the state of scientific knowledge was such that physical injury to a class of persons of which she was one was not reasonably foreseeable. Their Honours appear to have concentrated on mesothelioma rather than personal injury in general, and to have required that on the state of scientific knowledge there was positive foresight of harm rather than foresight that, given the uncertain state of knowledge, there might be harm. Fitzgerald P considered that "the known toxity" of asbestos dust and "the known uncertainty" as to the effects of exposure to asbestos dust, together with knowledge that injury or illness might not emerge for many years, gave rise to a BC9800336 at 17 risk which "could not be dismissed as 'remote', 'slight', far-fetched', or 'fanciful'". The decision in that case obviously depended on the evidence before the court, but I respectfully prefer the approach adopted by Fitzgerald P. Foreseeability does not necessarily mean proximity and a duty of care. As earlier noted, however, in a case such as the present it is highly influential, if not determinative. After a detailed review of the evidence, Judge O'Meally concluded that CSR and ABA "had an undoubted role in the establishment of the town of Wittenoom; in its maintenance, in its appearance, and in its operation." His Honour described Wittenoom as "in truth a company town", existing to serve the working population and the families of the mine and mills, and said that ABA "had a control that was significant, that was almost absolute, and an influence that was pervasive". These findings were amply justified on the evidence. The tailings used in the town were supplied by ABA. Mrs Olson's father was employed by ABA, which must have known that he and his family lived in Wittenoom and were subjected to what I have called the external exposure. ABA was in a position to warn Mrs Olson's parents that they and their children were at risk of injury. In my opinion there was a relationship of proximity such that CSR and ABA owed to Mrs Olson a duty of care, relevantly, given the existing prevalence of tailings and the other occasions for inhalation of asbestos fibres, to warn of the risk thereby presented. Other matters on liability CSR and ABA submitted that Judge O'Meally was in error in the significance he attributed to the blue-grey haze over the town as an indication that the BC9800336 at 18 concentration of particles in the atmosphere exceeded the Dreseen standard; on a related matter, they submitted that certain material tendered pursuant to r4 of the rules made under the Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989 (the Dr Kilpatrick evidence) was wrongly admitted or was used beyond the confines within which it was admitted. The conclusions to which I have come stand even if that significance and that material be put aside, and it is unnecessary to deal with the submission. It might be observed, however, that apart from this disputed evidence Judge O'Meally could have acted on Professor Ferguson's evidence in relation to dust visible in the atmosphere, evidence given in the context of the blue-grey haze over the town seen from a distance rather than the confines of a mine or mill, that - "That assumption is made if you can see a cloud of dust generated by an asbestos process, you are looking at large particles and a lot of which - most of which are not asbestos but since it is an asbestos process, there is enough particles there that are responsible to be potentially harmfuland counting by the standards of the day was in million particles per cubic foot not necessarily fibres but including fibres" [emphasis added]. CSR and ABA also submitted that Judge O'Meally had failed properly to consider the evidence of Professor Ferguson in his reasons, referring to Mifsud v Campbell (1991) 21 NSWLR 725. That case establishes that it is an incident of judicial duty for the judge to consider all the evidence in the case, but it also establishes that it is not necessary to refer to all the evidence led or to indicate what of it is accepted or rejected, and that the extent of the duty to record the evidence given and the findings made depends, as does the duty to give reasons, on the circumstances of the particular case. Failure to refer to some of the evidence does not mean that the BC9800336 at 19 judge had failed to discharge his duty. There was a vast amount of evidence before Judge O'Meally, and it was not incumbent upon him to rehearse it all. Having considered the evidence of Professor Ferguson to which we were taken and his Honour's references thereto in his reasons, I consider that Judge O'Meally paid appropriate regard to the evidence and am not persuaded that he failed in his judicial duty. The result on liability There was no appeal against the findings that Mrs Olson had no relevant exposure to asbestos other than at Wittenoom and that she contracted mesothelioma as a result of inhaling asbestos fibres while at Wittenoom; nor was there an appeal against the finding that, if Mrs Olson's mother had been warned that she and her family were at risk of injury, the family would not have remained at Wittenoom. The potential injury was severe, a warning to Mrs Olson's mother would have been easy, and I do not think it was seriously in dispute that, if there were a duty of care, a warning of the risk was an appropriate response to the risk of injury: if it was in dispute, I consider that such a response was appropriate and necessary. There being a duty of care, breach of the duty of care, and the contraction of mesothelioma caused by the breach of the duty of care, Judge O'Meally was correct to hold CSR and ABA liable. Damages The damages of $823,594 comprised -

|   |   |
|---|---|
|General damages|$150,000|
|Interest on past general damages|$2,000|

BC9800336 at 20

|   |   |
|---|---|
|Loss of expectation of life|$20,000|
|Out-of-pocket expenses|$4,400|
|Future out-of-pocket expenses|$15,000|
|Past and future home care|$42,500|
|Wage loss|$473,000|
|Lost superannuation|$112,694|
|Loss of long service leave agreed at|$4,000|
||--------|
||$823,594|

CSR and ABA appealed in relation to the general damages of $150,000, the award for loss of expectation of life of $20,000, the award for "wage loss" of $473,000, the award for "lost superannuation" of $112,694, and the award for "loss of long service leave" of $4,000.

(a) General damages and loss of expectation of life

CSR and ABA properly acknowledged that Mrs Olson had suffered and would suffer great pain and distress. She had been in good health. She had a thorocotomy in April 1994, was on morphine although in the latter period of her life without adequate pain control, and underwent procedures for removal of fluids. She was deprived of the happy times with her husband and children and of a fulfilling life, a deprivation all the greater because of her relatively young age with a life expectancy of 47 years. As found by Judge O'Meally, "she has experienced anger, fear and rage at her lot". It was submitted, however, that where her condition was diagnosed in April 1994, the hearing was in December 1994, and she was then expected to live for about three months, the short period of her suffering made the $150,000 excessive, and that the $20,000 was also excessive because of its cumulative effect on top of the $150,000. BC9800336 at 21 Sullivan v Micallef (1994) ATR 81-308 affirms that the award of general damages is a discretionary exercise. It is a principled discretion, whereby the damages should reflect some perceived notion of fair compensation in our society and should not be disproportionate to awards for other losses or inconsistent with other awards for similar losses. But what matters is the particular circumstances of the case before the court, since injuries of the same kind will affect different people differently, and that is no doubt one reason why it is not permissible to test proportionality by reference to particular awards in other cases: Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa (1968) 119 CLR 118; CSR Ltd v Bouwhuis (1991) 7 NSWCCR 223. (No submissions were addressed to possible relaxation of this embargo in the light of Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd (1993) 178 CLR 44). We must seek to apply "general experience" of current levels of damages, difficult though it may be to distinguish between that general experience and the particular awards in other cases from which it is derived. Accepting to the full the terrible effects on Mrs Olson of her contraction of mesothelioma, I consider that the cumulative amount awarded went beyond the range open to Judge O'Meally. In my opinion a total award of $120,000 for both general damages and loss of expectation of life, of which $80,000 should be in respect of past general damages, should be substituted.

(b) Wage loss

The $473,000 was for future loss of earning capacity. Judge O'Meally found that it was "probable" that Mrs Olson would have returned to the workforce at a BC9800336 at 22 particular time, progressed in a particular way in the civil service, and retired at age 60. He then said - "The calculations which have been agreed between the parties on the assumptions made and which I am satisfied would probably have become facts, entitle the plaintiff to a sum of $473, 000. It should be said that that sum allows for deductions for the vicissitudes of life and for her own maintenance." The calculations must have been those of Mr Rossetto, who took a future economic loss after tax of $749,378 on the basis of full time employment and the particular progression in the civil service, reduced it to reflect $100 per week for Mrs Olson's maintenance, and discounted it by 15 per cent for vicissitudes, to arrive at $475,471. Elsewhere in his reasons Judge O'Meally said that he had accepted $100 per week as being the cost of Mrs Olson's maintenance during her working life. CSR and ABA submitted that there were a number of reasons for finding that Mrs Olson would not have been in full time employment until age 60 with the particular progression, and that Judge O'Meally had erroneously treated the full time employment and progression as certainties when he should have considered their (lesser) probability in accordance with Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) 169 CLR 638 and Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 333. They submitted also, or perhaps in the alternative, that the discount of 15 per cent for vicissitudes was inadequate because the uncertainty of continuous employment in the public service and some health problems material to such employment required a greater discount than normal. BC9800336 at 23 Judge O'Meally found that the health problems "would have no effect upon her employment nor upon her achieving her intention to remain in the workforce", and I do not think that finding can be gone behind. But in my view his Honour did treat what he referred to as probability of full time employment and progression as certainty, and by the conventional discount for vicissitudes he did not compensate for this error. He accepted that Mrs Olson was qualified by experience and temperament for employment in the civil service, and had undertaken a course of study to that end; he also accepted that flexible working arrangements could be made. However, there was a deal of evidence that there was competition for senior positions in the public service, that there had been attrition in the public service, and that service "in policy areas" (which was Mrs Olson's expressed preference) did not enjoy guaranteed continuity. His Honour referred to "a general curtailment of the number of public servants", but said that there was "ample opportunity for those qualified to work in policy areas". Opportunity is not the same as certainty of full-time employment and progression, and I do not think that this was a finding that, despite the reasons to the contrary, the probability of full time employment and progression was such that it should be treated as a certainty. A degree of probability must be assessed and the award adjusted accordingly: Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd at 743. The exercise is different from, but overlaps with, a discount for vicissitudes. I consider that a proper allowance for less than certainty plus vicissitudes is to reduce the economic loss as calculated after allowance for Mrs Olson's maintenance by 30 per cent. BC9800336 at 24 CSR and ABA submitted that the allowance for Mrs Olson's own maintenance was too low. The evidence was all from Mrs Olson. At one point she assessed her expenditure at "$100, $150, I don't know"; at another point she assessed it at $60 to $80, and then "probably $100-$120" as a result of going back to work. These figures did not include fares. Counsel for CSR and ABA before Judge O'Meally submitted that his Honour should take $110 plus an allowance for transport and power, and while the same counsel on appeal submitted that we should take $250 he was constrained to invite the Court to apply "common knowledge of the value of goods and services". Given the state of the evidence, the range open to his Honour was considerable, and I am not persuaded that he erred in taking $100 per week.

(c) Lost superannuation

Judge O'Meally said - "A claim is made also for lost superannuation benefits. There is little difference in the calculations made by the accountants engaged on behalf of the plaintiff and the accountants engaged by the defendants. However, whilst the plaintiff's calculations put the sum at $112,694 that is a figure assessed upon investment returns in superannuation funds over the past 10 years. A figure has been taken by the defendants' accountant on investment return over the past 12 months and whereas the plaintiff's accountant postulates a return in the order of 10 per cent, the defendants' accountant postulates a nett return in the order of seven and half per cent. It is my view that the accountant qualified by the plaintiff had taken what is the more reasonable and probable approach and therefore his calculation of the loss of $112, 694 should be accepted. The defendants argue that from this, should be taken a sum which would reflect the cost of the plaintiff's maintenance, after the superannuation became payable. Though it has not been recited, a figure of $100 was accepted by me as being the cost of the plaintiff's maintenance during her working life. I can see no reason in fact or in BC9800336 at 25 law why further deductions should be made from the value of the lost superannuation and I would propose therefore to award the sum of $112,694 to the plaintiff " [Emphasis added] The "plaintiff's calculations" were those of Mr Rossetto. They assumed a contribution of a percentage of salary, and so should have reflected any adjustment for probability and discount for vicissitudes earlier considered. CSR and ABA submitted that they did not. They did not reflect any adjustment for probability because there was no such adjustment. Reference to Mr Rossetto's report shows that they did not reflect any discount for vicissitudes, and Mr Rossetto agreed in his oral evidence that there had been no deduction for vicissitudes. Although Mrs Olson submitted that the base amount had already been discounted for vicissitudes, that is not so. In my opinion the award for lost superannuation should be reduced accordingly.

(d) Loss of long service leave

The figure of $4,000 was described in the reasons as an agreed figure, and on appeal CSR and ABA so described it. They said that they had "disputed the entitlement", referring to a submission to Judge O'Meally - "It is submitted that long service leave can be taken either at the end of employment or during the course of employment when an entitlement arises, and it is submitted that in any allowance for long service leave, some recognition of the fact that long service leave can be taken during employment should be made, or alternatively, that employment may change in which case an entitlement may not in fact arise." Mr Rossetto's calculations assumed that no long service leave would be taken prior to Mrs Olson's retirement at age 60. The figure calculated was $8,018. We were not taken to any material indicating how the agreement upon the figure of $4,000 BC9800336 at 26 came about. It was probably to accommodate the submission of CSR and ABA set out above; the figure would be appropriate to do so. I do not think that error has been shown in the figure of $4,000. Costs By far the greater time was devoted to liability, but there were detailed written submissions as to damages. CSR and ABA have been largely successful as to damages, and have achieved a not insignificant reduction in the judgment. On a broad estimation that one-tenth of the costs of the appeal were referable to damages, CSR and ABA should pay 90 per cent of Mrs Olson's costs of the appeal and Mrs Olson should pay 10 per cent of their costs of the appeal. Orders

1. Appeal allowed in part.
2. Judgment for $823,594 set aside and in lieu thereof judgment for $613,095 taking effect on 24 December 1994.
3. Appellants to pay 90 per cent of respondent's costs of the appeal, respondent to pay 10 per cent of appellants' costs of the appeal.
4. Respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.

## Coles AJA

BC9800336 at 1 I agree with the reasons of Giles AJA with one exception. That relates to the amount of general damages. I would not disturb the findings of Judge O'Meally in respect of that item. Mrs Olson first noticed feelings of ill-health at about Christmas 1993 or January 1994. She developed pain in her side which, in her words "came and went and then stayed". She had a rasping dry cough, and these symptoms caused her to seek medical attention. After some medical consultations she had an x-ray and was then referred to Westmead Hospital in about March. That led to the tapping of the pleural effusion in late March and the subsequent thoracotomy in April. BC9800336 at 2 From then on her physical pain and mental distress increased. She was taking morphine tablets three times per day and in addition took liquid morphine when the pain became too great. She was prescribed medication for depression. She could not sleep well, despite taking sleeping tablets, and when she did sleep she had dreadful nightmares. She lost weight and developed curvature of the spine. Not surprisingly, she found it increasingly difficult to help look after her two small children. For some months before the hearing in December 1994 she found that towards the end of the day she would be in tears and would ring her husband and ask him to come home early, which he did. Despite the constant doses of morphine, Mrs Olson suffered increasing pain, and a medical consultation as to pain control was of no assistance. She said that although she was trying to resist, she felt that she had got a lot worse up to the time of the hearing. She was having panic attacks when she became breathless and imagined what she called the worst was happening or about to happen. She was angry and upset that she would not see her children grow up or achieve what they might want to achieve. Thus, when the hearing took place, Mrs Olson had for nearly a year suffered first from discomfort and then from increasing pain and anguish. She was expected to have only about three months to live. The judge had the BC9800336 at 3 opportunity to see her and to gauge the extent to which she had suffered and was continuing to suffer. In that regard he had an advantage not available to judges on appeal (see Sullivan c Micallef (1994) Aust Torts Reports 81-308 at p61,789 per Mahoney AP). I share with Giles AJA the difficulty of applying general experience of current levels of damages whilst not being permitted to compare other awards of general damages in order to obtain that experience. The resultant unrealistic approach which the Courts must take was commented on, amongst others, by Priestley JA in CSR Ltd v Bouwhuis (1991) 7 NSWCCR 223 at 251. The approach to be taken was dealt with by Mahoney AP in Sullivan case, above. He referred to the discretionary nature of the awarding of general damages and to the role of an appellate court in interfering with that discretion only in exceptional cases. In his dissenting judgment, Clarke JA, whilst applying the same principles, took into account the fact that the highest awards given (as at 1994) for general damages, including pain and suffering, were in the order of $300,000. These were usually damages suffered by young persons suffering permanent and serious disability. General damages in other cases, where the suffering was severe but not of that order, should be looked at with that benchmark in mind. Clarke JA therefore considered that the Court was bound to BC9800336 at 4 reduce the damages awarded. The other members of the Court were of different view. Thus, in exercising the same principles, members of a court on appeal may differ as to the result. That illustrates the difficulty in dealing with a discretionary decision. In the present case the amount of $150,000, as well as the award of $20,000 for loss of expectation of life, seem to me to be high, but not so high as to suggest that the judge below went beyond his proper discretionary powers. Mrs Olson suffered and would suffer from increasing pain, although over a period taken to be not more than 14 or 15 months. She was young, with two small children and a painful death was forecast within a short period. She suffered the mental agony of knowing that she would never see her children grow up and that they would not have a mother. That suffering and knowledge made her case more significant than many others. In considering the question of general damages Judge O'Meally said "It is difficult to recollect a more tragic case which has come for hearing before this Tribunal. The plaintiff's young age makes the deprivation she will suffer from loss of contact with her family propound". I do not regard the holding of that view and the amount of damages which followed from it as justifying this Court in interfering with the judge's discretion. BC9800336 at 5 In respect of the sum of $20,000 given for loss of expectation of life, that is linked to but is slightly different in its nature from the general damages. His Honour referred to the sum of $12,500 being an amount commonly awarded under this heading to persons in their late 50s, or in their 60s or 70s. He thought that the age of Mrs Olson justified a greater amount. Again, I do not consider that his discretion has miscarried. I agree with what has been said by Giles AJA in respect of loss of future earnings and superannuation. In view of the opinion of the other members of the Court as to general damages I agree that the orders should be as proposed by Giles AJA.

## Order

1. Appeal allowed in part.
2. Judgment for $823,594 set aside and in lieu thereof judgment for $613,095 taking effect on 24 December 1994.
3. Appellants to pay 90 per cent of respondent's costs of the appeal, respondent to pay 10 per cent of appellants' costs of the appeal.
4. Respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.

Counsel for the appellants: J Poulos QC/J J Fernon Solicitors for the appellants: Ebsworth & Ebsworth Counsel for the respondent: B Toomey QC/J T Rush QC/G Farmer Solicitors for the respondent: Turner Freeman
