Limited Liability and the Corporation Frank H. Easterbrookt Daniel R. Fischeltt

### Limited liability is a fundamental principle of corporate law.

Yet liability has never been absolutely limited. Courts occasionally allow creditors to "pierce the corporate veil," which means that shareholders must satisfy creditors' claims. "Piercing" seems to happen freakishly. Like lightning, it is rare, severe, and unprincipled. There is a consensus that the whole area of limited liability, and conversely of piercing the corporate veil, is among the most confusing in corporate law.' We argue to the contrary that economic analysis-in particular the theory of the firm and the economics of insuranceexplains the legal treatment of limited liability. Both the rules and the exceptions serve valuable functions. I. INTRODUCTION It may be helpful to recall what limited liability is. The liability of "the corporation" is limited by the fact that the corporation is not real. It is no more than a name for a complex set of contracts among managers, workers, and contributors of capital. It has no existence independent of these relations. The rule of limited liabilt Judge, United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit; Lee and Brena Freeman Professor of Law, University of Chicago. tt Professor of Law, University of Chicago. We thank Douglas G. Baird, Walter J. Blum, William M. Landes, Bernard D. Meltzer, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Richard A. Posner, Steven Shavell, and George J. Stigler for helpful comments on earlier drafts. The Law and Economics Program of the University of Chicago Law School provided support for the research and writing of this paper. The paper is part of an ongoing project that should appear under the title THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF CORPORATE LAW. l One commentator described the legal analysis as jurisprudence by metaphor or epithet. It does not contribute to legal understanding because it is an intellectual construct, divorced from business realities. The metaphors are no more than conclusory terms, affording little understanding of the considerations and policies underlying the court's actions and little help in predicting results in future cases . . . . As a result, we are faced with hundreds of decisions that are irreconcilable and not entirely comprehensible. Few areas of the law have been so sharply criticized by commentators. PHILLIP BLUMBERG, THE LAW OF CORPORATE GROUPS: PROCEDURAL PROBLEMS IN THE LAW OF PARENT AND SUBSIDIARY CORPORATIONS 8 (1983) (footnote omitted).


### 90 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89
ity means that the investors in the corporation are not liable for more than the amount they invest. A person who pays $100 for stock risks that $100, but no more. A person why buys a bond for $100 or sells goods to the firm for $100 on credit risks $100, but no more. The managers and the other workers are not vicariously liable for the firm's deeds. No one risks more than he invests. Limited liability is not unique to corporations. Indeed it is the rule. Suppose a bank lends $100 to a partnership, and the partnership's liabilities later greatly exceed its assets. (Perhaps the partnership buries toxic waste and incurs stupendous costs of cleaning up the mess.) The bank may lose the $100, but it will not be required to contribute any additional capital. Its liability is limited to its investment, exactly as the shareholder's liability is limited in a corporation.

### The instances of "unlimited" liability are few. The general

### 19851 Limited Liability and the Corporation 91


### 92 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89

### Halpern, Trebilcock, and Turnbull have advanced a different
explanation for limited liability.' Their stimulating article argues that limited liability is necessary for the existence of an organized securities market. If equity investors could be required to contribute additional capital, the value of shares would not be the same to every investor. The greater a particular investor's wealth in relation to that of other investors in the same firm, the higher the probability that the investor's personal wealth would be reached in the event of corporate default. The greater the anticipated cost of this additional capital contribution, the less this investor would be willing to pay for shares. Because different investors would attach different values to shares, depending on the investors' wealth, it would be impossible to conduct an organized liquid market. Limited liability makes markets possible. The relation between limited liability and organized securities markets is fundamental to an understanding of the rule of limited liability, but it is not a complete explanation. Indeed in one sense it merely restates the question. Why is it important for the residual claimants of one kind of firm (publicly held corporations) to have access to organized securities markets while residual claimants of other firms (partnerships, close corporations, cooperatives, and so forth) do not? A complete explanation of limited liability must answer this question. A related point is that organized securities markets provide benefits that cannot be completely appropriated by the participants. Unless investors in a firm can capture private benefits exceeding the private costs, they will not incur these costs. An understanding of why some firms but not others incur the costs of participation in an organized securities market sheds much light on the rationale of limited liability. Finally, why could markets with unlimited liability not be organized in ways that would prevent wealth from making a difference? Firms could obtain insurance for the investors, or the actual investments could be made by clearing houses or other intermediaries with constant wealth. Investors in futures markets regularly put at risk more than their initial investments, but guarantees issued by brokers and clearing houses permit the operation of liquid markets. An explanation of limited liability must establish why we do not see risk shifting or guarantees of this sort among investors in corporations.

### We provide an explanation for why limited liability facilitates


### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 93

### 94 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89


### 96 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89
tity and wealth of other investors is irrelevant. Shares are fungible; they trade at one price in liquid markets. Under a rule of unlimited liability, as Halpern, Trebilcock, and Turnbull emphasized, shares would not be fungible. Their value would be a function of the present value of future cash flows and of the wealth of shareholders. The lack of fungibility would impede their acquisition. An acquiror who wanted to purchase a control bloc of shares under a rule of unlimited liability might have to negotiate separately with individual shareholders, paying different prices to each. Worse, the acquiror in corporate control transactions typically is much wealthier than the investors from which it acquires the shares. The anticipated cost of additional capital contributions would be higher to the new holder than the old ones. This may be quite important to a buyer considering the acquisition of a firm in financial trouble, for there would be a decent chance of being required to contribute to satisfy debts if the plan for revitalization of the firm should go awry. Limited liability allows a person to buy a large bloc without taking any risk of being surcharged, and thus it facilitates beneficial control transactions. A rule that facilitates transfers of control also induces managers to work more effectively to stave off such transfers, and so it reduces the costs of specialization whether or not a firm is acquired. Fourth, limited liability makes it possible for market prices to impound additional information about the value of firms. With unlimited liability, shares would not be homogeneous commodities, so they would no longer have one market price. Investors would therefore be required to expend greater resources analyzing the prospects of the firm in order to know whether "the price is right." When all can trade on the same terms, though, investors trade until the price of shares reflects the available information about a firm's prospects. Most investors need not expend resources on search; they can accept the market price as given and purchase at a "fair" price.1' Fifth, as Henry Manne emphasized, limited liability allows more efficient diversification. Investors can minimize risk by owning a diversified portfolio of assets. Firms can raise capital at lower costs because investors need not bear the special risk associated with nondiversified holdings. This is true, though, only under a

### 11 See J. LORIE & M. HAMILTON, THE STOCK MARKET: THEORIES AND EVIDENCE (1973);


### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 97

### 98 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89

### B. Limited Liability and Firms' Cost of Capital

Limited liability does not eliminate the risk of business failure. Someone must bear that loss. Limited liability is an arrangement under which the loss largely lies where it falls. Loss is swallowed rather than shifted. Each investor has a guaranteed maximum on the loss he will bear. In a firm with debt, that guaranteed maximum is combined with a preference for the debtholder. The shareholder is wiped out first. To this extent risk is "shifted" from debt investor to equity investor. In a regime of unlimited liability still more risk would be shifted. Because someone must bear the entire risk of business failure under any rule, some have argued that the importance of limited liability has been exaggerated."4 The benefit to stockholders from limited liability, the argument runs, is exactly offset by the detriment to creditors. Stockholders are more secure and so demand a lower rate of return under limited liability, but creditors demand a higher rate; the opposite is true under unlimited liability. The firm's cost of capital, the argument continues, is the same under either rule. (We postpone to Part III the question of tort creditors, who are not compensated for bearing risks.) The validity of this argument depends on whether the risk that the value of the firm will be less than the value of the creditors' claims can be borne equally well by creditors and stockholders. Several factors are pertinent to this question: the extent of common interests, relative monitoring costs, relative information and coordination costs, and attitudes toward risk.
1. The Extent of Common Interests. The argument that

### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 99
mize the value of the firm, for example, may be ousted in a takeover. Thus some takeovers may cause creditors to be worse off ex post. But so long as takeovers increase the probability that the value of firms' assets will be maximized, shareholders and creditors, joint claimants on a bigger pie, will be better off. Thus a regime including takeovers benefits creditors as well as shareholders."' The other effects are straightforward, too. The capital market is more likely to be efficient under a rule of limited liability. An efficient capital market generates price signals that are useful to all investors in a firm, including creditors. Limited liability decreases the cost of searching for good investments for creditors as well as stockholders.
2. Relative Monitoring Costs. Shareholders have less reason

### 100 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89
creditors possess limited liability than when only creditors do.
3. Relative Information and Coordination Costs. Another
reason why shareholders pay creditors to assume more of the risk of business failure might be that the creditors possess a comparative advantage in monitoring particular managerial actions. As we have stressed, individual shareholders, specialized suppliers of capital, do not actively monitor managers' actions. They rely on third parties (such as large institutional holders or prospective contestants for control) to do so and buy shares at appropriate moments. Though the debt investors do not have the residual claim, and thus do not have optimal incentives to monitor day-to-day activities, they may be especially well suited to watch certain kinds of conduct. Banks and other institutional investors tend to have specialized knowledge about particular industries and may be good monitors of major decisions such as building new plants. The lender may provide financing to several firms in an industry and thus augment its knowledge. These debt investors commonly negotiate detailed contracts giving them the right to disapprove managers' decisions that are important enough to create significant new risk for the firm, though perhaps not important enough to spark a contest for control.

### An investor's possession of particular information does not,

### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 101
mation costs than shareholders, limited liability has a clear advantage. Because creditors bear more of the risk of business failure under a rule of limited liability, they have more incentive to employ their knowledge.

4. Attitudes Toward Risk. Both equity and debt investors
can diversify their holdings, thus minimizing the risk of investing in any one firm. Economy-wide (systematic) risk, however, cannot be eliminated by diversification. Where two parties are risk averse, the optimal contractual arrangement is one in which each bears some risk."8 Limited liability is such a risk-sharing arrangement. Under limited liability, both shareholders and creditors risk the loss of their investments; under unlimited liability, shareholders would bear almost all risk. Risk sharing therefore might be a good explanation of limited liability. C. Insurance as an Alternative to Limited Liability The advantages of limited liability suggest that, if it did not exist, firms would attempt to invent it. One close substitute is insurance. If firms could purchase insurance to cover their liabilities to debt investors, the firms' structure would be much the same as now.19 Shareholders' liability would be limited to the amount of their investment; creditors would receive a lower rate of return because of their greater security. The firm could purchase insurance for investors as a group. (The transaction costs of shareholders individually purchasing insurance would be prohibitive. Each shareholder would have to negotiate with the insurer. The insurer would have to monitor the wealth of the insured and all other shareholders to assess the riskiness of its own position.) The firm could buy its insurance from existing creditors, a separate insurer, or both. It would make a decision based on factors including relative information and coordination costs. In some circumstances creditors might have a comparative ad-

### 857 (1982).


### 102 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89
vantage in assessing the riskiness of a transaction initially and superior ability to monitor the conduct of the firm for the duration of the agreement. In that event, the firm would buy its insurance from the creditors. This is essentially what we observe. The creditors assume some risks of business failure, just as they would if they were "insurers" as well as creditors. The legal rule of limited liability is a shortcut to this position, avoiding the costs of separate transactions.20

### One advantage of purchasing insurance from separate insurers

### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 103
caused by economy-wide events against which the insurer cannot diversify. Moreover, complete bankruptcy insurance creates a moral hazard: it invites managers to take excessive risks. Both equity and debt investors would stop monitoring the managers, and insurers are not likely to provide optimal monitoring in the face of this moral hazard. Without complete bankruptcy insurance, some group must bear the risk of business failure. If shareholders bear all the risk, the problems of unlimited liability reappear; if creditors share some of this risk, the situation is identical to the rule of limited liability. The bankruptcy example illustrates a more general problem with insurance as an alternative to limited liability-who will insure the insurer? If insurers assume the risk of business failure, unpaid claims of the insured firms could exceed the capital of the insurer. This risk must be borne by someone. Shareholders of insurance companies might have unlimited liability, but this could inhibit the formation of large insurers, thus exacerbating the problem. Alternatively, both shareholders and creditors of the insured firm could bear the risk, and the same analysis would govern whether limited or unlimited liability is the superior institutional arrangement. In sum, the problem all along has been: is it better to allow losses to lie where they fall, or to try to shift those losses to some other risk bearer? This is an empirical question. The market's answer is partial risk shifting. The equity investors bear more risk than the debt investors, but debt investors continue to bear substantial risk, and the risk of all investors is limited to the amount they sink at the start. This arrangement appears to have substantial survival value, for reasons we have discussed. If greater risk shifting were beneficial, we should have seen it evolve in the market. It is no answer to say that transaction costs are high, so the evidence from survival is ambiguous. It is easy to make contracts governing stockholders' liability. Lenders to close corporations commonly require personal guarantees by investors or other modifications of limited liability. We discuss in Part IV why they do so. For now the point is that if people frequently contract around limited liability for the smallest firms, it is impossible to attribute the failure to do likewise for larger firms to transaction costs. The survival of limited liability is indeed highly informative. III. LIMITED LIABILITY AND THE EXTERNALIZATION OF RISK

### Because limited liability increases the probability that there


### 104 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89
will be insufficient assets to pay creditors' claims, shareholders of a firm reap all of the benefits of risky activities but do not bear all of the costs. These are borne in part by creditors. Critics of limited liability have focused on this moral hazard-the incentive created by limited liability to transfer the cost of risky activities to creditors-as a justification for substantial modification of the doctrine.23 Externalization of risk imposes social costs and thus is undesirable. The implications of this point, however, are unclear, both because modifying limited liability has its costs and because moral hazard would exist without limited liability. The social loss from reducing investment in certain types of projects-a consequence of seriously modifying limited liability-might far exceed the gains from reducing moral hazard. Too, even the abolition of limited liability would not eliminate the moral-hazard problem. The incentive to engage in overly risky activities is a general phenomenon that exists whenever a person or firm has insufficient assets to cover its expected liabilities.24 Although the problem of moral hazard may be more severe under limited liability, it will exist under any rule. As we have stressed, the magnitude of these gains and losses is an empirical matter on which the dominance of limited liability-when it is simple to pass greater risks to equity investors by contract-speaks eloquently. At all events, the magnitude of the externality under limited liability has been exaggerated. As Richard Posner has demonstrated, there is no externality with respect to voluntary creditors.25 In addition, firms have incentives to insure for amounts greater than their existing capital. The insurance company becomes a contract creditor, reducing the externality. We discuss these points below. A. Limited Liability and Voluntary Creditors Employees, consumers, trade creditors, and lenders are voluntary creditors. The compensation they demand will be a function of the risk they face. One risk is the possibility of nonpayment be- 23 See, e.g., Landers, A Unified Approach to Parent, Subsidiary, and Affiliate Questions in Bankruptcy, 42 U. CHI. L. REV. 589 (1975); Stone, The Place of Enterprise Liability in the Control of Corporate Conduct, 90 YALE L.J. 1, 65-76 (1980). 24 See Keeton & Kwerel, Externalities in Automobile Insurance and the Uninsured Driver Problem, 27 J.L. & ECON. 149 (1984); Shavell, Liability for Harm versus Regulation of Safety, 13 J. LEGAL STUD. 357 (1984); Steven Shavell, The Judgment Proof Problem (1984) (unpublished manuscript on file with The University of Chicago Law Review).

### 25 Posner, supra note 3, at 503.


### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 105

### 106 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89

### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 107

### 108 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89

### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 109
highly correlated. Even when offered, the insurance will exclude very large losses. On the other hand, our discussion of firms' incentives to insure suggests that firms will insure in some situations where people and partnerships would not. A corporation with a fleet of trucks might insure for an amount in excess of its capital, for example, while an individual owner with few assets might insure for a small amount or not insure at all.3" IV. PIERCING THE CORPORATE VEIL Courts have allowed creditors in some situations to reach the assets of shareholders. The justification for this is obscure. State law typically says that limited liability is absolute.36 Moreover, the nominal tests used by courts-whether a corporation has a "separate mind of its own," whether it is a "mere instrumentality," and so forth-are singularly unhelpful. The arbitrariness of these nominal tests casts further doubt on the utility of the doctrine. We conclude, however, that the doctrine of piercing the corporate veil, and the distinctions drawn by courts, may make more sense than at first appears. The cases may be understood, at least roughly, as attempts to balance the benefits of limited liability against its costs. Courts are more likely to allow creditors to reach the assets of shareholders where limited liability provides minimal gains from improved liquidity and diversification, while creating a high probability that a firm will engage in a socially excessive level of risk taking. We discuss below the more important aspects of the doctrine. A. Close Versus Public Corporations Almost every case in which a court has allowed creditors to reach the assets of shareholders has involved a close corporation.37 The distinction between close and public corporations is supported

### 36 See Keeton & Kwerel, supra note 24, at 154-56.


### 110 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89

### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 111
creditors to reach the assets of corporate as opposed to personal shareholders is again consistent with economic principles. Allowing creditors to reach the assets of parent corporations does not create unlimited liability for any people. Thus the benefits of diversification, liquidity, and monitoring by the capital market are unaffected. Moreover, the moral-hazard problem is probably greater in parent-subsidiary situations because subsidiaries have less incentive to insure. In publicly held corporations, the inability of managers to diversify their firm-specific investments in human capital creates incentives to insure. The same is not true for managers of subsidiaries if, as often will be the case, these people are also managers of the parent. Bankruptcy of the subsidiary will not cause them to lose their positions in the parent or suffer any other loss of firm-specific human capital (though it might impose a reputational loss on them). If limited liability is absolute, a parent can form a subsidiary with minimal capitalization for the purpose of engaging in risky activities. If things go well, the parent captures the benefits. If things go poorly, the subsidiary declares bankruptcy, and the parent creates another with the same managers to engage in the same activities. This asymmetry between benefits and costs, if limited liability were absolute, would create incentives to engage in a socially excessive amount of risky activities.

### It does not follow that parent and affiliate corporations always

### 112 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89

C. Contracts Versus Torts, and the Fraud or Misrepresentation Exception

### Courts are more willing to disregard the corporate veil in tort

### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 113


### 114 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89


### 1985] Limited Liability and the Corporation 115

### 116 The University of Chicago Law Review [52:89
