Cambridge Journal of Economics 2010, 34, 837-856 doi: 10.1093/cje/ben040 Advance Access publication 28 November 2008 Limited liability, shareholder rights and the problem of corporate irresponsibility Paddy Ireland* There has long been a tendency to see the corporate legal form as presently constituted as economically determined, as the more or less inevitable product of the demands of advanced technology and economic efficiency. Through an examination of its historical emergence, focusing in particular on the introduction of general limited liability and the development of the modern doctrine of separate corporate personality, this paper takes issue with this view, arguing that the corporate legal form was, and is, in large part a political construct developed to accommodate and protect the rentier investor. It is, moreover, a construct which institutionalises irresponsibility. Against this backdrop different ways of trying to resolve the problem of corporate irresponsibility are explored. The key, the paper suggests, is to be found in decoupling the privilege of limited liability from rights of control.

### Key words: Corporate governance, Corporate irresponsibility. Limited liability,

### Rentier investment

### JEL classifications: BIO, B20, B50, K00, LOO, N00, D20

### 1. Introduction

Free incorporation by registration came to Britain in 1844, followed in 1855 by gene limited liability, putting in place two of the central elements of the corporate legal for has come to dominate business organisation around the world. There has long a tendency to see the emergence of the corporate legal form as not requiring much way of explanation. It is widely regarded, as one group of corporate law scholars rec put it, as 'induced by economic exigencies' (Kraakman et al., 2004, p. 1). Its ke elements—legal personality, limited liability, transferable shares, delegated managem and shareholder primacy—are thought to be economically indispensable, so much so 'corporate law everywhere must, of necessity, provide for them' (pp. 1,215). It is this that underlies the recent claim that we have reached 'the end of history for corporate that, driven by economic forces, corporate law around the world is convergin a shareholder-oriented model of the corporation with the same essential legal fe (Hansmann and Kraakman, 2001). Manuscript received 19 November 2007; final version received 8 September 2008. Address for correspondence: Kent Law School, Eliot College, University of Kent, Canterbury, Ke

### 7NS, UK; email: p.w.ireland@kent.ac.uk

* Kent Law School, UK. Paper first delivered at the Corporate Accountability, Limited Liability a

### 838 P. Ireland

### The view that the corporate legal form as presently constituted is

Limited liability, shareholder rights and corporate irresponsibility 839 abandonment of limited liability, either in general (Campbell and Griffin, 2006) or in the specific context of parent-subsidiary relations (Blumberg, 1986; Muchlinski, 2007) and/or non-contractual corporate liabilities (Hansmann and Kraakman, 1991). In making these calls, these commentators implicitly question in various ways the validity of the principle of separate corporate personality. It should, they suggest, in certain contexts at least, be taken less seriously and corporations more closely identified with their shareholders. This questioning of the corporate legal form as currently configured is to be welcomed. It should not be taken for granted and presented as an unproblematic, economically determined necessity. As political constructs, the corporate legal form and its constituent elements— separate personality, limited liability and so on—should be subjected to critical analysis. However, this paper argues that history suggests that while in some contexts it may indeed be appropriate to take separate corporate personality less seriously in order to tackle the problem of corporate irresponsibility, in many others it might be more appropriate to take it more seriously and to emphasise, rather than to downplay, the separation of companies from their shareholders. The key to getting corporations to behave responsibly, it argues, may lie in decoupling limited liability from control rights.

2. The JSC and industrialisation

### 840 P. Ireland
not affected by either the slow reform of the law or hostile legal Indeed, there is considerable evidence that industrialists in mid-V generally opposed to the changes effected by the Companies Acts controversial introduction of general limited liability (Bryer, Commission, 1854). But if the 'dramatic' legal changes of the midlittle to do with the financial requirements of manufacturing ind p. 41), why were the Companies Acts passed? And why was the limited liability, now widely regarded as an economic necessity an free market and freedom of contract, so controversial?

3. JSCs and the principles of partnership

Limited liability, shareholder rights and corporate irresponsibility 841 some circumstances in which Smith, nevertheless, thought JSCs defensible: where the capital required in an industry was beyond that which could be collected into a partnership, where the risks were unusually great, where the operations of the business could be reduced to 'routines', and where there was an identifiable public benefit from their formation. In Smith's view, however, only where these conditions were met was it appropriate for the state to sanction JSC formation and grant companies the legal privileges (such as corporate status and limited liability) that took them outside the general laws of partnership (Smith, 1776) Smith's views on the inherent inefficiency of JSCs and the limited circumstances in which it was legitimate to grant them legal privileges were very influential. Indeed, they shaped state policy well into the nineteenth century, with corporate privileges and exemptions from the law of partnership being, for many years, granted to JSCs only when Smithian conditions were satisfied (Taylor, 2006). When added to the continuing belief in the justice and efficacy of the law of partnership and to the continuing ability of industry to meet its financial needs within the partnership form, the lack of pressure from industry for the introduction of free incorporation and limited liability becomes more easily un derstood, as do the controversies which surrounded the introduction of general limited liability in 1855.

4. The law of partnership and the rentier investor
The explanation for the introduction of free incorporation and general limited liability and the gradual development of the modern corporate legal form is to be found not in the needs of industry but in the needs of finance. Their emergence is inextricably linked to the rise of the rentier investor. During the course of the early nineteenth century, as wealth grew, the upper and middle class search for profitable investment outlets intensified. Although both government debt and land provided outlets, they were limited in scope and did not generally offer particularly good returns. One result of this was that from the early nineteenth century British capital began to flood abroad in search of secure oudets offering better returns (Jenks, 1927). Part of the problem facing rentiers, foreshadowing the City Industry divide, was that industrialists were generally able to meet their financial needs within the partnership form and able to fund expansion through the plough back of profits. This made it difficult for prospective rentier investors to tap into, and claim a share of, the growing wealth being generated by industry.1 Moreover, even if investment opportunities in industry did become available to rentiers, they had to contend with the law of partnership and the threat posed by unlimited liability. Unsurprisingly, rentiers were strongly urged by contemporaries to take an active interest in any firms in which they were thinking of becoming partners, as not only their capital but their whole personal wealth was at stake (Ward, 1852). Alternatively, they could, if the opportunity arose, lend money to partner ships at fixed rates of interest, rendering them creditors rather than partners ('owed rather than owning'), but while this was less risky, the maximum rate of return was limited by the usury laws, which remained in force until 1854. With their numbers steadily increasing, 1 In Capital, Marx argued that 'the complete rule of industrial capital has been acknowledged by English commercial capital and by the "moneyed interest" (financial aristocracy) only since the abolition of the corn duties etc.' It is often thought that Marx was claiming here that the people who owned and ran industry (the 'industrial bourgeoisie') had, by the 1840s and 50s, taken control of state power. It seems clear, however, that he was referring not to the political dominance of industry but to the recognition by the 'financial aristocracy' that industry and the exploitation of industrial wage labour was now the primary source of surplus value

### (Marx, 1893; Bryer, 1997).


### 842 P. Ireland
investment in JSCs was another possibility, but in ^incorporat the partnership principle of unlimited liability still applied an companies with limited liability the continued existence of extens shares meant that rentier investments of this sort were still poten The growing desperation (and greed) of the burgeoning rentier c and better returns on, their money fuelled a series of booms in JS half of the nineteenth century (see Harris, 2000; Hunt 1936; Taylo invariably ended in collapses and were invariably characterised by many years, however, the misery caused to rentiers elicited little shareholders, The Times complained in 1840, wanted to 'enjoy consistently with the luxury of being sleeping partner[s]'. Th embark in business without being a man of business; to be able to trade without knowledge of trade, or any education in it; with character, without any attention or exertion ... '. JSCs were 'a me idleness, in compulsory idleness.' There was, the paper added, ' wanting to make the morsel wholesome as well as tempting' to th liability. Fortunately, the 'force of experience' and 'good sense' stoo paper concluded, were not only 'inconsistent with the solid and p but 'contradict[ed] the proper principles of partnership' (9 Oct

### 1840). As this suggests, while it was by now fully accepted that inv
to a return, it was also thought that there was a limit to the return money could reasonably or legitimately expect. There was little com lost money speculating in the hope of securing the higher rates of r reward for active participation in 'trade'.

5. Accommodating the rentier: the retreat from the law of partnership
From the 1830s, however, with the growth of the railways, the number of rentier investors began to increase rapidly and with this so too did their political and legal influence. From around 1840 more and more modifications were made to the law of partnership as it applied to JSCs. These departures from partnership principles were nearly all aimed at accommodating and protecting the rentier JSC shareholder. From the mid-1830s, for example, as a developed market in JSC shares emerged for the first time, the JSC share was judicially redefined. Having previously been deemed an equitable interest in the assets of a company (a 'share' in the literal sense), the JSC share was legally reconceptualised as a right to profit, a form of property in its own right quite separate from the assets of the company.1 Thereafter there were two quite different pieces of joint stock property: the concrete assets owned by 'the company', and the shares, intangible rights to profit owned by shareholders (Ireland, 1996). The share had become a form of what Marx called 'fictitious capital' with a capital value of its own determined by the stock market (Hilferding, 1910; Marx, 1893, chs 25 and 29). In this process, shareholders themselves were recharacterised. No longer were they legally conceptualised as industrial capitalists, as active, asset-owning partners; they were, rather, conceptualised as passive, money-providing 'investors', as money capitalists, owners of income rights external to 'the company' and the process of production (Ireland et al., 1987; Marx, 1893).

### 1 Bligh v. Brent (1837) 2 Y & C 268.


### 844 P. Ireland
amongst other things, prompt the formation of JSCs and generate for rentiers, protected now by limited liability rather than by ext liability, its advocates argued, would not only encourage invest creation of outlets for investment—there were frequent referenc unused capital—for the benefit of the country as a whole. The str success, however. Although there was a major boom in JSC fo culminating in the Overend Gurney crisis of 1866, manufacturing dominated by family firms and partnerships. As Cottrell says, the p yielding but still reasonably secure investment outlets 'was not so of limited liability ... [for] manufacturers generally neither took the change in the law nor complained about a shortage of cap limited liability legislation nevertheless marked a 'victory for the i industrialists' (Jeffreys, 1938),1 shifting risk and responsibility f turning many of the principles of partnership on their head controversial. Until its passing, argued Edward Cox, the editor of T partnership had been: ... that he who acts through an agent should be responsible for his age shares the profits of an enterprise ought also to be subject to its lo obligation, which it is the duty of the laws of a civilised nation to enfo contracts and make reparation for wrongs. Limited liability is founded and permits a man to avail himself of acts if advantageous to him, and them if they should be disadvantageous; to speculate for profits witho make contracts, incur debts, and commit wrongs, the law depriving th and the injured of a remedy against the property or person of the wr however small, at which it may please him to determine his own lia

6. From limited liability to no liability


### 846 P. Ireland
identify themselves very closely with the companies in which the purposes, while seeing themselves as completely separate from the

7. The reification of the company: separate corporate personality

Limited liability, shareholder rights and corporate irresponsibility 847 mattered far less to companies who their shareholders were and far less to shareholders who their fellow shareholders were. For creditors, the only assets available to meet their debts were now those of 'the company', the property of which was no longer backed by a reserve fund composed of residual shareholder liabilities. The process of 'defensive asset partitioning' was thus completed (Hansmann and Kraakman, 2001), and with this so too was the separation of companies from their shareholders. In the last quarter of the nineteenth century the modern doctrine of separate corporate personality, with its reified corporations and 'complete separation' of shareholders and company, crystallised out. Indeed, by this time, the law relating to JSCs had so departed from partnership principles that 'company law'—previously regarded as a mere branch of the law of partnership— emerged as a legal category in its own right (Ireland, 2003).

8. Extending separate personality and limited liability: from one-man

### 848 P. Ireland
capitalists), thus came to be applied to one-man and other sma companies which were, in reality, nothing more than incorporate ships and small partnerships. It was not long before nearly enterprises were incorporated, limited liability companies (Ireland Equally importantly, in the inter-war period, when corporate gro the UK for the first time, again in significant part as a result of t businessmen to suppress competition (Hannah, 1976; Lucas, 193 was formalistically extended to subsidiary companies with lit companies came to be regarded as completely separate entities fro controlled and often wholly owned, and, as such, entitled to the p limited liability. The application of limited liability to corpora Blumberg says, an 'historical accident' (1986, p. 605), but it made possible the construction of strings of parent, subsidiary, sub-subsidiary and associated companies, each of which is a separate legal person whose shareholders (often simply one or more other companies in the group) benefit from limited liability. This remains the case even when a parent company has complete effective control of a subsidiary whose directors may be the nominees or even the same persons as the directors of the parent (Blumberg, 1986; Muchlinski, 2007). The rigid application of the Salomon principle, coupled with de facto no-liability shareholding, has thus greatly extended the scope for opportunistic behaviour, further institutionalising corporate irresponsibility. It is not, perhaps, surprising that the leading legal academic Otto Kahn-Freund, writing in 1944 when group structures were beginning to proliferate, described Salomon and its rigid application by the courts as 'calamitous' (1944).

9. Taking separate corporate personality less seriously: a return to unlimited

Limited liability, shareholder rights and corporate irresponsibility 849 This has led some to argue for a return, either in whole or in part, to unlimited liability. Thus, for some, shareholders should be unlimitedly liable for the tortuous liabilities of companies (Hansmann and Kraakman, 1991); for others parent companies should in many, if not all, circumstances be made liable for the debts of the subsidiaries they control (Muchlinski, 2007). For still others, there should be a more general return to the old partnership principle of unlimited liability. Limited liability, they argue, creates incentives for reckless and irresponsible risk taking; it makes them 'rational and legitimate'. It 'does not provide rational encouragement to business initiative' but 'by eliminating the fear of incurring personal liability should risk-taking even in disastrous loss, gives an unbalanced incentive to such risk-taking' (Campbell and Griffin, 2006, p. 48). Indeed, echoing the early nineteenth century defenders of the principles of the law of partnership, this argument is commonly framed in terms of a restoration of 'the market'. Limited liability, it is suggested, represents a legislative 'ousting' of the market which 'isolate [es] investors from the full range of market influences' and cocoons them from 'the most fundamental market pressure, fear of personal bankruptcy'. From this perspective, the remedy for corporate irresponsibility and recklessness is a restoration of the principle of unlimited liability and the true, 'undistorted' market. Even if, they argue, this led to a lower overall rate of growth as the current orthodoxy would have it—which is by no means certain—the shape and pattern of growth might nevertheless be more welfare-enhancing (Campbell and Griffin, 2006).1

10. Taking separate corporate personality more seriously: a challenge

### 850 P. Ireland


### 852 P. Ireland
remuneration—the rise of such things as share options and performance-related bonuses—were beginning radically to realign the interests of executives, bringing them closer to those of shareholders. By the early 1990s, the principle of shareholder primacy had been restored with a vengeance. Corporate managers today are much more account able than they were—to the rentier shareholders with whom they are now much more closely entwined. Hence the relentless pursuit of 'shareholder value' by whatever means and whatever the human, social and environmental costs. The consequences have been only too clear: a massive increase in speculative financial exchanges, regular financial crises, numerous corporate scandals, falling growth rates, a reduction in the rates of productivity growth and soaring executive remuneration (Wedderburn, 2004). In making share prices rather than production the guiding lights of economic activity (Harvey, 2005, p. 32), activist shareholding via institutions has, as Doug Henwood says, simply added 'another layer of potential irresponsibility' (1997, 292). It has also contributed to the steady increase in wealth and income inequality (nationally and internationally) that has characterised the last two or so decades, for although it is often implied that with the rise of private pensions 'we are all (more or less) shareholders now' (see, for example, Mitchell, 2001, p. 147), share ownership, like the ownership of financial property in general, remains very heavily concentrated in the very wealthiest.1 Despite this, more and more policy makers, with the loyal support of many academics, still insist upon the economic superiority of an unequivocally shareholder-oriented model of the corporation and are working hard to extend its global reach through the agencies of the World Bank and the OECD (OECD, 2004; Soederberg, 2004). Shareholder primacy and shareholder rights are now, however, defended less on the basis of the fundamental moral principles associated with ideas of private property and 'ownership' (highly problematic in the corporate context, despite their continuing common sense appeal), and more on their alleged instrumental value in contributing to efficiency, growth and development. They are defended, in other words, on grounds of'economic exigency' (Ireland, 2001).

11. Decoupling limited liability from control rights
What we have, then, are two very different approaches to the problem of corporate irresponsibility: one which advocates taking separate corporate personality less seriously and a return to unlimited liability, and another which advocates taking it more seriously and a rejection of the exclusively shareholder-oriented model of the corporation. Can the two approaches be reconciled? History is again capable of clarifying some of the issues involved. As we have seen, during the heated debates surrounding limited liability in the mid nineteenth century, many of the advocates of limited liability argued for the introduction not of general limited liability but of something resembling the French societe en commandite. This was a limited partnership in which rentier investors ('special' partners) were given the privilege of limited liability, while the active, managing ('general') partners operated with unlimited liability. It was a legal form that offered limited liability to rentiers but only on the condition that they remained passive and inactive. Their rights and powers in the firm and their ability to intervene in management were strictly limited. If they interfered too much in management, they lost their privileged status as 'special' partners and became 'general' partners subject to unlimited liability (Troubat, 1853). For the rentier 1 In the USA at the turn of the century, for example, the wealthiest 1% held (directly and indirectly) about

### 50% of corporate stocks and the wealthiest 10% held about 90% (Ireland, 2005).


### 854 P. Ireland

Limited liability, shareholder rights and corporate irresponsibility 855 Ireland, P. 1999. Company Law and the Myth of Shareholder Ownership, Modern Law Review>, vol. 62, 32-57 Ireland, P. 2001. Defending the Rentier: Corporate Theory and the Reprivatization of the Public Company, pp. 141-173 in Parkinson, J and Gamble, A. (eds), The Political Economy of the Company, Oxford, Hart Publishing Ireland, P. 2003. Property and Contract in Contemporary Corporate Theory, Legal Studies, vol. 23, 453-509 Ireland, P. 2005. Shareholder Primacy and the Distribution of Wealth, The Modern Law Review, vol. 68, no. 1, 49-81 Ireland, P., Grigg-Spall, I. and Kelly, D. 1987. The Conceptual Foundations of Modern Company Law, Journal of Law and Society, vol. 14, 149-165 Jeans, J. S. 1894. Trusts, Pools and Corners, London, Methuen Jeffreys, J. B. 1938. Trends in Business Organisation in Great Britain since 1856, PhD thesis, University of London Jenks, L. H. 1927. The Migration of British Capital to 1875, New York and London, Knopf Kahn-Freund, O. 1944. Some Reflections on Company Law Reform, Modern Law Review, vol. VII, 54-67 Kaysen, C. 1957. The Social Significance of the Modern Corporation, American Economic Review, vol. 47, 311-319 Keynes, J. M. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Collected Writings Vol. VII, London, Macmillans 1973 Kraakman, R., Davies, P., Hansmann, H., Hertig, G., Hopt, K, Kanda, H. and Rock, E. 2004. Anatomy of Corporate Law, Oxford, Oxford University Press Landes, D. 1960. The Structure of Enterprise in the Nineteenth Century: The Cases of Britain and Germany, Xle Congres Internationale des Sciences Historiques, Rapports, V, Histoire Contemporaire, Uppsala Laski, H. 1925. A Grammar of Politics, London, George Allen & Unwin Lucas, A. L. 1937. Industrial Reconstruction and the Control of Competition, London, Longmans, Green & Co Macrosty, H. W. 1907. The Trust Movement in British Industry, London, Longmans Marx, K. 1893. Capital Volume III, London, Lawrence and Wishart 1974 edn McCulloch, J. R. 1856. Considerations on Partnerships with Limited Liability, London, Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans Mercantile Laws Commission. 1854. First Report, 1854 P.P. 1854, XXVII Mitchell, L. .E. 2001. Corporate Irresponsibility: America's Newest Export, New Haven and London, Yale University Press Muchlinski, P. 2007. Multinational Enterprises and the Law (2nd edn) Oxford, Oxford University Press Musson, A. E. 1978. The Growth of British Industry, London, Batsford Nichols, T. 1969. Ownership, Control and Ideology, An Inquiry into Certain Aspects of Modern Business Ideology, London, George Allen and Unwin OECD. 2004. OECD Principles of Corporate Governance, Paris, OECD Payne, P. L. 1974. British Entrepreneurship in the Nineteenth Century, London, Basingstoke, Macmillan Pettet, B. 2001. Company Law, Harlow, Longman Pillay, R. G. 2006. CSR and Development: The Mauritian Experience, paper presented at th

### International Academy of African Business and Development (IAABD) 7th Annual


### 856 P. Ireland
