### 442 ALL ENGLAND LAW REPORTS [1962] 1 All E.R.
of the three issues should not proceed together. I therefore dismiss the summons A with costs. Application dismissed. Solicitors: Gregory, Roweliffe & Co. (for the defendants); Kenneth Brown, Baker, Baker (for the plaintiffs).

### [Reported by JENIFER SANDELL, Barrister-at-Law.]

JONES AND ANOTHER v. LIPMAN AND ANOTHER. [CHANCERY Division (Russell, J.), June 16, July 26, 1961.] Specific Performance—Purchaser’s action—Transfer of land by vendor to company controlled by him—Transfer a sham—Decree granted against vendor and company— Whether summary procedure appropriate—R.S.C., Ord. 144, r. 1. The first defendant agreed to sell freehold land with registered title to the plaintiffs for £5,250. Pending completion he sold and transferred the land to the defendant company (having a capital of £100), which he acquired and of which he and a clerk of his solicitors were sole shareholders and directors, for £3,000, of which £1,564 was borrowed by the defendant company from a bank and the rest remained owing to the first defendant. Held: (i) in the circumstances of this case the defendant company was a cloak for the first defendant, who could compel a transfer of the land to the plaintiffs, and the court would accordingly decree specific performance against both defendants. Elliott v. Pierson ({1948] 1 All E.R. 939) and observations in Gilford Motor Co., Ltd. v. Horne ({1933] All E.R. Rep. at pp. 117, 119, 121) applied.

### (ii) procedure under R.S.C., Ord. 144, was appropriate.

[ Editorial Note. It seems that any possibility of a transfer pending completion being surreptitiously effective to defeat a purchaser’s contract would be removed if a caution were registered on contract under s. 54, s. 59 of the Land Registration Act, 1925 (compare p. 445, letter E, post). As to the defence to an action for specific performance that performance is impossible by reason of circumstances, see 36 HatsBury’s Laws (3rd Edn.) 318, 319, para. 457. As to a vendor’s ability to show a good title if he can compel conveyance by a third party, see 34 Hatsspury’s Laws (3rd Edn.) 271, para. 443, ef. pp. 325, 326, para. 551; and for cases on the subject, see 40 Diarsr (Repl.) 146, 147, 1115-1130.]

### Cases referred to:

Elliott v. Pierson, [1948] 1 All E.R. 939; [1948] L.J.R. 1452; sub nom. Hlliott and H. Elliott (Builders), Lid. v. Pierson, [1948] Ch. 452; 2nd Digest Supp. Gilford Motor Co., Lid. v. Horne, [1933] All E.R. Rep. 109; [1933] Ch. 935; 102 L.J.Ch. 212; 149 L.T. 241; Digest Supp. Smith v. Hancock, [1894] 2 Ch. 377; 63 L.J.Ch. 477; 70 L.T. 578; 58 J.P. 638; 43 Digest 53, 549.

### - Action.

This was an action by specially indorsed writ for specific performance of an agreement in writing, dated Feb. 27, 1961, whereby the first defendant agreed to sell to the plaintiffs for £5,250 freehold property, No. 3, Fairlawns Avenue, Acton, the title to which was registered with absolute title under the Land Registration Act, 1925, but which was subject to a mortgage to a building society; and agreed

### B

### F

### G

### Ch.D. JONES v. LIPMAN 443
to sell to the plaintiffs the chattels therein for £750. The date fixed for completion was Mar. 20, 1961. On Mar. 12, 1961, the first defendant asked to be released from the contract, but the plaintiffs refused intimating that, if necessary, they would sue for specific performance. On: Mar. 21, 1961, the plaintiffs gave notice making time the essence of the contract for completion within twentyeight days. On Mar. 22, 1961, the first defendant’s solicitors wrote to say that he was willing to complete on Apr. 5, 1961. Their instructions having been withdrawn, other solicitors for the first defendant wrote on Mar. 30, 1961, saying that he had transferred the property to a third party and was in breach of contract. On May 5, 1961, the plaintiffs’ solicitors were informed by the first defendant’s solicitors that registration of the transfer had been completed and that the land was in possession of the purchaser’s mortgagees; and it was suggested that damages were the only remedy. On May 10, 1961, while not admitting any but nominal damages, £250 damages were offered on behalf of the first defendant. On May 2, 1961, the plaintiffs issued a writ specially indorsed with a claim for specific performance and damages in addition or alternatively. The sole defendant at that time was the first defendant. On May 30, 1961, the plaintiffs issued a summons under R.S.C., Ord. 144. On June 16, 1961, at the hearing before the master, an affidavit was tendered on behalf of the first defendant stating that he had transferred the property on Mar. 30, 1961, to Alamed, Ltd., that registration of the transfer had been completed, and the offer of £250 damages was repeated. The affidavit made no mention of any consideration for the transfer. Leave was given to join Alamed, Ltd. as a defendant and the matter was adjourned. Alamed, Ltd. was joined as second defendant accordingly and a claim was added against both defendants or either for an order setting aside the transfer and damages for conspiracy. Affidavit evidence for the plaintiffs, subsequently filed, showed that Alamed, Ltd. was incorporated with a nominal capital of £100 in shares of £1 each and with the main object of acquisition of land and property; it was formed by law stationers and the registered office was at their address; there were no directors; the secretary had resigned on Mar. 24, 1961, when Alamed, Ltd. was “sold ” to the first defendant’s solicitors. The first defendant was still in residence at the property. The summons was adjourned to the judge in chambers and by him into court for full argument, with a direction (under R.S.C., Ord. 14a, r. 3 (2)) that the directors and secretary of the defendant company, and the first defendant, should attend to be examined on oath and to produce any documents in their possession or control relevant to the question whether the defendant company acquired a title to the property that was good against the plaintiffs and whether the defendant company was a trustee for the first defendant. When the summons came on next for hearing in open court counsel for the defendants intimated, on the instructions of a clerk of the defendants’ solicitors, that it had not been possible in the time to arrange for the directors and secretary to attend, but that the first defendant had been telephoned and a letter had been sent to him. Inquiry of the defendants’ solicitors was directed to be made by telephone who the other directors and secretary were and with a view to counsel being instructed accordingly. Subsequently counsel was instructed that the defendants wished to appeal against the order directing attendance for oral examination, but information as to the identity of the other directors and secretary was declined. The plaintiffs were given leave to amend the prayer of the statement of claim by adding a prayer for specific performance also against the defendant company, and the matter was further adjourned to afford the defendants opportunity to file evidence showing the facts relating to the company and the transfer of the property. The matter was adjourned to be heard in chambers. From affidavit evidence of the first defendant thereafter filed it appeared that there had been a contract by him to sell the land to the defendant company for £3,000; for this purpose the company had borrowed £1,564 from a bank, which sum it paid to the first defendant, and the balance remained owing to the first defendant. The sum of £1,564

### 444 ALL ENGLAND LAW REPORTS {1962} 1 All E.R.
was the exact amount required to pay off the existing mortgage to the building society. The directors of the defendant company were the first defendant and a clerk of his solicitors; they also were the registered shareholders in the defendant company.
- The following judgment was delivered in open court.

### G. Ellenbogen for the plaintiffs.

### M. Finer for the defendants.

RUSSELL, J., having stated the facts and reviewed the course of proceedings, continued: When the matter came on again in chambers the affidavit evidence by the first defendant made it plain (i) that the defendant company was, and at all material times had been, under the complete control of the first defendant, and (ii) that the acquisition of the defendant company by the first defendant and the transfer to it of the real property comprised in the contract with the plaintiffs (for the chattels remained in the ownership of the first defendant) was carried through solely for the purpose of defeating the plaintiff’s rights to specific performance and in order to leave them to claim such damages, if any, as they might establish. So much was, quite rightly, admitted by counsel for the’ defendants. For the plaintiffs the argument was twofold. First: that specific performance would be ordered against a party to a contract who has it in his power to compel another person to convey the property in question; and that admittedly the first defendant had this power over the defendant company. Second: that specific performance would also, in circumstances such as the present, be ordered against the defendant company. For the first proposition reference was made to Elliott v. Pierson (1). In that case resistance to specific performance at the suit of a vendor was grounded on the fact that the property was vested in a limited company and not in the vendor. The company, however, was wholly owned and controlled by the vendor, who could compel it to transfer the property, and on this ground the defence to the claim for specific performance failed. It seems to me, not only from dicta of the learned judge but also on principle, that.it necessarily follows that specific performance cannot be resisted by a vendor who, by his absolute ownership and control of a limited company in which the property is vested, is in a position to cause the contract to be completed. For the second proposition reference was made to Gilford Motor Co., Lid. v. Horne (2). In that case the individual defendant had entered into covenants restricting his trading activities. It caused the defendant company in that case to be formed. This company was under his control and did things which, if they had been done by him, would have been a breach of the covenants. An injunction was granted not only against him but also against the company. In that case Lorp Hanworrs, M.B., after referring to Smith v. Hancock (3), said (4): “* LINDLEY, L.J., indicated (5) the rule which ought to be followed by the court: ‘If the evidence admitted of the conclusion that what was being done was a mere cloak or sham, and that in truth the business was being carried on by the wife and Kerr for the defendant, or by the defendant through his wife for Kerr, I certainly should not hesitate to draw that conclusion, and to grant the plaintiff relief accordingly.’ I do draw that conclusion.

### I do hold that the company was ‘a mere cloak or sham’; I do hold that it
was a mere device for enabling Mr. E. B. Horne to continue to commit breaches of [the covenant], and in those circumstances the injunction must go against both defendants...”

### LAWRENCE, L.J., in his judgment, said (6):

### (1) [1948] 1 All E.R. 939; [1948] Ch. 452.

(2) [1933] All E.R. Rep. 109; [1933] Ch. 935. (3) [1894] 2 Ch. 377. (4) [1933] All E.R. Rep. at p. 117; [1933] Ch. at p. 961.

### (5) [1894] 2 Ch. at p. 385.

### (6) [1933] All E.R. Rep. at p. 119; [1933] Ch. at p. 965.

### A

### A

### Ch.D. JONES v. LIPMAN (Russg1i1, J.) 445

‘*. . . I agree with the finding by the learned judge that the defendant company was a mere channel used by the defendant Horne for the purpose of enabling him, for his own benefit, to obtain the advantage of the customers of the plaintiff company, and that therefore the defendant company ought to be restrained as well as the defendant Horne.” |

### Similarly, Romer, L.J., said (7):

‘‘In my opinion, FARWELL, J., was perfectly right in the conclusion to which he came .. . that this defendant company was formed and was carrying on business merely as a cloak or sham for the purpose of enabling the defendant Horne to commit the breach of the covenant that he entered into deliberately with the plaintiffs on the occasion of and as consideration for his employment as managing director. For this reason, in addition to the reasons given by my Lords, I agree that the appeal must be allowed with the consequences which have been indicated by the Master of the Rolls.” Those comments on the relationship between the individual and the company apply even more forcibly to the present case. The defendant company is the creature of the first defendant, a device and a sham, a mask which he holds before his face in an attempt to avoid recognition by the eye of equity. The case cited (8) illustrates that an equitable remedy is rightly to be granted directly against the creature in such circumstances. Counsel for the defendants argued that though there was no dispute as to the facts, this was not a case for summary judgment under R.S.C., Ord. 14a, since there was a matter of law which should be kept for argument at the trial, and on which there was sufficient uncertainty to justify leave being given to defend. He submitted that the plaintiffs’ second proposition ran counter to the express statutory provisions as to title to be found in s. 20 and s. 59 of the Land Registration Act, 1925. On the plaintiffs’ first proposition he argued (correctly) that the facts were not the same as those in the present case: and further that the point was not plain. In my judgment, however, the case is & plain one, and appropriate to be dealt with under R.8.C., Ord. 14a. It would be quite wrong to conclude that there was justification for giving leave to defend, and I decline to do so. The propositions put forward for the plaintiffs are plainly correct. The proper order to make is an order on both the defendants specifically to perform the agreement between the plaintiffs and the first defendant, but excepting from the order against the defendant company that part of the agreement. which involves the chattels. Accordingly, the court will declare that the contract. dated Feb. 27, 1961, mentioned in the writ of summons, ought to be specifically performed as to both the realty and personalty comprised therein by the first. defendant and as to the realty comprised therein by the second defendant.

### Order accordingly.

Solicitors: D. Miles Griffiths Piercy & Co. (for the plaintiffs); Beach & Beach (for the defendants).

### [Reported by JENIFER SANDELL, Barrister-at-Law.}

(7) [1933] All E.R. Rep. at p. 121; [1933] Ch. at p. 969. (8) [1933] All E.R. R ep. 109; [1933] Ch. 935.
