### H

### Ch.D.] Re F. G. (FILMS), LTD. 615

Re F. G. (FILMS), LTD. (CHaNnceRy DIvISION (Vaisey, J.), February 12, 18, 1953.] Cinematograph—Film—British film—Making by British company—Company incorporated in England—Nominee of foreign company—Cinematograph Films Act, 1938 (c. 17), 8. 25 (1), 8. 44 (1). For a cinematograph film to be made by a British company, within s. 25 (1) of the Cinematograph Films Act, 1938, and so to be deemed to be a British film under that sub-section the company must establish themselves as the sole makers of the film. To do this they must show that they have actually and substantially ‘‘ undertaken” the arrangements necessary for the making of the film, and have not acted merely as nominees or agents of a foreign company. Where, therefore, a company had a capital of £100, no premises except their registered office, and no staff, HELD: they could not be regarded as the ‘‘ makers ’’ of a film which a foreign company had financed to the extent of £80,000, and, therefore, the film was not to be deemed to be a British film. For THE CINEMATOGRAPH Fiums Act, 1938, s. 23, s. 24, s. 25 (1), see HALSBURY'S STATUTES, Second Edn., Vol. 25, pp. 91-93; and For THE CINEMATOGRAPH Fiims Act, 1948, see ibid., p. 111 et seq. ADJOURNED Summons for a declaration that (i) the applicants, F. G. (Films), Ltd., were the makers of the film called “‘ Monsoon” within the meaning of the Cinematograph Films Acts, 1938 and 1948; (ii) the applicants throughout the time that the said film was being made were a British company within the meaning of the said Acts; (iii) the makers of the said film were throughout the time during which the said film was being made a British company within the meaning of the said Acts. Cyril Salmon, Q.C., and C. H. Duveen for the applicants. The Solicitor-General (Sir Reginald Manningham-Buller, Q.C.) and Denys B. Buckley for the Board of Trade. Cur. adv. vult. Feb. 18. WAISEY, J., read the following judgment. Section 22 of the Cinematograph Films Act, 1938, prohibits the distribution or exhibition of unregistered cinematograph films, and by s. 23 of the Act the Board of Trade is charged with the duty of registering such films. The register is to be so kept as to record in relation to each film a number of specified particulars, including the fact that it is, as the case may be, either a British film or a foreign film. In s. 25 (1) of the Act we find that a film is to be deemed to be a British film if, and only if (omitting immaterial words) ‘‘ (a) the maker of the film was, throughout the time during which the film was being made, either a British subject or a British company, and (b) the studio, if any, used in making the film was within [Her] Majesty’s dominions, and (c) not less than the requisite amount of labour costs represents payments paid or payable in respect of the labour or services of British subjects or persons domiciled in some part of [Her] Majesty’s dominions.” This application relates to a film entitled ‘ Monsoon ’’, and the applicants, F. G. (Films), Ltd., are seeking declarations (a) that they, the applicants, were the makers of the said film within the meaning of the said Act and of an amending Act of 1948, to which no further reference need be made in this judgment; (b) that throughout the time that the said film was being made they were a British company within the meaning of the said Act; and (c) that the maker of the said film was throughout the time during which it was being made a British company, meaning, that is to say, the applicants. The

### 616 [Marcu 5, 1953] ALL ENGLAND LAW REPORTS [| Vol. 1
respondents to the summons, the Board of Trade, admits that the applicants are a British company as defined in the Act, being a company incorporated in England and having the majority of its directors British subjects. The facts are that the applicants were incorporated on May 29, 1951, under the Companies Act, 1948, and have three directors, namely, a Mr. Forrest Judd, who is an American citizen, and a Mr. Edwin Arthur Davis and a Miss Marjorie Sutherland, who are both British subjects. It is further admitted that the studio used in making the film was within Her Majesty’s dominions, that is to say, in India. - There is also no question but that the statutory requirement concerning labour costs has been fulfilled. The sole question, therefore, which I have: to decide is whether the applicants were the makers of the film. This is what they claim to be, but the respondent has decided that they were not, and has, on that ground, refused to register the film ‘“‘ Monsoon ”’ as a British film. The applicants, being aggrieved by that decision, are, in accordance with s. 31 of the Act, making the present application to the court. In substance, I am asked to reverse the respondent’s decision and to say that ‘‘ Monsoon ”’ is a British film under the Act. In s. 44 of the Act the expression “ maker ”’ is defined as meaning. in relation to the film, “the person by whom the arrangements necessary for the making of the film are undertaken.” This is, perhaps, a strange collocation of words which might in other circum. stances give rise to some difficulty of interpretation. ‘‘ Undertake ’’ means, I think, “‘ be responsible for’’, especially in the financial sense, but also generally. So far as the present case is concerned, I think that it plainly suggests the following problem: Was it the applicants alone who undertook the arrangements necessary for the making of the film, or did they do so in co-operation with some other person, firm or company, reading as including the plural number (in accordance with the Interpretation Act, 1889) the words ** maker ’’, “* British subject ’? and ‘“ British company ”’ in s. 25 and the words ‘“ maker” and ‘“‘person”’ in the definition ? Here the applicants can only succeed if they establish themselves as the sole statutory makers of the film for, if they were (as may well be the case) one of several makers, the other ‘‘ maker ” or ‘‘ makers ” certainly cannot, in the circumstances of this case, be brought within the description of “‘ British subject” or ‘‘ British company ”’. Their claim is to be, or to have been, the sole exclusive maker of the film. The applicants have a capital of £100, divided into one hundred shares of £1 each, ninety of which were held by the said Mr. Forrest Judd and the remaining ten by the said Mr. Davis. The third director has no shareholding. I now understand that they have no place of business apart from their registered office, and they did not employ any staff. It seems to me to be contrary, not only to all sense and reason, but to the proved and admitted facts of the case, to say or to believe that this insignificant company undertook in any real sense of that word the arrangements for the making of this film. I think that its participation in any such undertaking was so small as to be practically negligible, and that it acted, in so far as it acted at all in the matter, merely as the nominee of and agent for an American company called Film Group Incorporated, which seems (among other things) to have financed the making of the film to the extent of at least £80,000 under the auspices and direction of the same Mr. Judd, who happened to be its president. The suggestion that this American company and Mr. Judd were merely agents for the applicants is, to my mind, inconsistent with and contradicted by the evidence, and a mere travesty of the facts, as I understand and hold them to be. The applicants’ intervention in the matter was purely colourable. They were brought into existence for the sole purpose of being put forward as having undertaken the very elaborate arrangements necessary for the making of this film and of

### F

### B

### F

### G

### Ch.D.] Re F. G. (FILMS), LTD. (Vaisry, J.) 617
enabling it thereby to qualify as a British film. The attempt has failed, and the respondent’s decision not to register “ Monsoon ” ” as a British film was, in my judgment, plainly right.

### Declaration accordingly.

### Solicitors: Edwin A. Davis (for the applicants); Solicitor, Board of Trade.

### [Reported by Miss Puiirpa Price, Barrister-at-Law.]

### KING v. PHILLIPS.

[Court or APppEa.: (Singleton, Denning and Hodson, L.JJ.), January 23, February 16, 1953.] Damages— Mental shock—Accident to child—Mother hearing scream and seeing something of accident while seventy to eighty yards away. A taxi-driver backed his taxicab negligently and without looking where he was going, and ran into a child who was on a tricycle immediately behind him, slightly injuring him. The child’s mother, who was in her house seventy or eighty yards away, heard him scream, and, looking out of a window, saw the cab back into the tricycle, but she could not see the child. In an action by her for damages for the shock thus suffered by her, Heutp (per SINGLETON and Hopson, L.JJ. ): the test of negligence vis-&-vis the mother was whether the taxi-driver could reasonably have foreseen the risk of damage to her; in the circumstances the taxi-driver could not reasonably have contemplated that, if he backed his taxicab without looking where he was going, he might cause to the mother the injury complained of; and, therefore, he owed her no duty of care and her claim should be dismissed.

### Hay (or Bourhill) v. Young ([1942] 2 All E.R. 396), applied.

### Hambrook v. Stokes Brothers ({1925] 1 K.B. 141), distinguished.

Per Denninec, L.J.: there was a duty of care owed by the taxi-driver, not only to the boy, but also to the mother; the driver was in breach of that duty, but in the circumstances the shock suffered by the mother could not reasonably have been foreseen by the driver; it was, therefore, too remote as a head of damage and the claim should be dismissed.

### Decision of McNair, J. ({1952] 2 All E.R: 453), affirmed.

As TO THE Duty TO TAKE CaRE, see HALSBURY, Hailsham Edn,, Vol. 23, pp. 568-587, paras. 823-840; and ror Casss, see DIGEST, Vol. 36, pp. 12-21, Nos. 33-101, and Digest Supps. As To REMOTENESS OF DAMAGE, see HALSBURY, Hailsham Edn., Vol. 10, pp. 103-109, paras. 130-136; and ror Casss, see DIGEST, Vol. 17, pp. 117- 120, Nos. 267-289. |

### Cases referred to:

(1) Hay (or Bourhill) v. Young, [1942] 2 All E.R. 396; [1943] A.C. 92; 111 L.J.P.C. 97; 167 L.T. 261; 2nd Digest Supp. (2) Owens v. Liverpool Corpn., [1938] 4 All E.R. 727; [1939] 1 K.B. 394; 108 L.J.K.B. 155; 160 L.T. 8; Digest Supp. (3) Hambrook v. Stokes Brothere, [1925] 1 K.B. 141; 94 L.J.K.B. 436; 132 L.T. 707; 36 Digest 123, 819. (4) Re Polemis & Furness, Withy & Co., [1921] 3 K.B. 560; sub nom. Polemis & Furness, Withy & Co., 90 L.J.K.B. 1353; 126 L.T. 154; 36 Digest 29, 151. (5) Chester v. Waverley Municipal Council, (1939), 62 C.L.R. 1; 39S.R.N.S.W. 173; 56 N.S.W.W.N. 94; Digest Supp. (6) Smith v. Johnson & Co., (1897), cited in, [1897] 2 Q.B. p. 61; 66 L.J.Q.B. p. 496; 76 L.T. p. 494; 36 Digest 124, 820.
