# Assignment Coversheet

# Using AI to support your learning

## Purpose of this Document

This resource provides guidance on how to use AI tools appropriately and ethically for this assessment. It also provides guidance on how to document AI use transparently.

You are responsible for the accuracy and integrity of your work, including any AI-generated content.

Section 1: Understanding the Expectations

Where terms and conditions of the assessment task allow it, you may use AI tools to support your learning and task completion. Some of the uses of AI are provided in Section 3.

You must:

•	Document your AI use using the table in Section 3.

•	If applicable, follow the attribution guidelines outlined in your assessment task sheet.

•	Ensure all work submitted is your own, and AI outputs are verified.

UQ recommends using Microsoft Copilot as a general AI tool. The data input is encrypted and not used to train other AI tools. You can access Copilot using your student Microsoft login. For legal research, the Law School recommends you use LexisNexis Protégé. Protégé is accessed from the UQ Library site.

For more information on using AI in your studies, see the AI Student Hub.

## Section 2: Inappropriate AI use

Although AI use is permitted in non-secure assessment, some AI use can interfere with the development of professional skills or raise ethical or legal concerns.

Appropriate ways of using AI to support your academic and professional skills are provided in Section 3: Documenting AI Use.

The following uses of AI are not permitted for this assessment task:

Submitting AI-generated material as your own work. Submitting content generated by AI without meaningful modification, critical evaluation, or attribution is poor academic practice which will be reflected in marks / grades.

Submitting AI-generated content, including sources and citations, that has not been verified by you. AI tools may produce inaccurate, misleading, or inappropriate outputs, including images, text, or media. Submitting content without verification is poor academic practice which will be reflected in marks / grades.

Uploading any UQ Library resources to AI platforms. This includes journal articles, book chapters, and other licensed materials. Doing so breaches the service agreements between UQ and academic publishers - including when using AI tools embedded in UQ systems (e.g. Microsoft Copilot).

## Section 3: Documenting AI Use

The following list outlines some of the uses of AI.

Please complete the AI Declaration by describing the uses of AI that have supported your task completion.

To assist you in doing this, the following lists some of the ways that you might use AI in the research, analysis and writing of the assessment task

Important: Follow any additional guidance on documenting AI use as outlined in your assessment task sheet.

## AI Use Acknowledgement

By submitting this assessment, I confirm that:

I am responsible for the integrity and accuracy of my work, including any AI-generated content

I have documented my use of AI by:

Acknowledging/citing AI-generated content where required by the assessment task sheet

Completing the AI Use Declaration (table above).

______________________