# Slide 1

Electronic Transferable Records

LAWS5151
Dr Alan Davidson 2026

1

# Slide 2

Development

Need and Purpose

2

# Slide 3

Resources

LC
https://youtu.be/IILRjmdy6FI Y 2.00 – 3.20

UNCITRAL 2021
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LOTFaGCpC3E (3 hours)

For details on the implementation status, see (there is a video): https://www.tradefinanceglobal.com/posts/status-update-mletr-adoption-in-the-g7-and-emerging-markets/

3

# Slide 4

Background

Model Law of Electronic Commerce 1996
Model Law of Electronic Signatures 2001
UN Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts 2005

UNCITRAL Model Law of Electronic Transferable Records (2017)
https://uncitral.un.org/sites/uncitral.un.org/files/media-documents/uncitral/en/mletr_ebook_e.pdf

4

# Slide 5

Article 2(2) of the Electronic Communications Convention specifies exclusions:
2. This Convention does not apply to bills of exchange, promissory notes, consignment notes, bills of lading, warehouse receipts or any transferable document or instrument that entitles the bearer or beneficiary to claim the delivery of goods or the payment of a sum of money.

Note that this definition could well extend to payment instruments such as Letters of Credit and Bank Payment Obligations.

5

# Slide 6

Singularity
Uniqueness

“UNCITRAL was of the view that finding a solution for this problem required a combination of legal, technological and business solutions, which had not yet been fully developed and tested.”

6

# Slide 7

2011 - the Commission (UNCITRAL) held a Colloquium:
“with a view to identifying a roadmap for future work by the Commission in the area of electronic commerce, with particular regard to legal issues relating to electronic transferable records.”

7

# Slide 8

UNCITRAL Model Law of Electronic Transferable Records 2017

Purpose - to facilitate the legal use of ETRs domestically and internationally
MLETR applies to ETRs that are functionally equivalent to transferable documents or instruments. 
https://uncitral.un.org/sites/uncitral.un.org/files/media-documents/uncitral/en/mletr_ebook_e.pdf

Singapore
Bahrain
UAE
Papua New Guinea
Mexico
UK (Digital Trade Act?)
USA (equivalent laws? UCC)
Germany
China 
Timor Leste
Paraguay
France
Tuvalu
[Australia] note the Digital Economy Agreement signed with Singapore.

8

# Slide 9

Adoption of the MLETR - Mexico, Papua New Guinea (PNG) and Singapore

China - intention to adopt laws which equivalent to MLETR. 
Plans to first adopt MLETR in the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone. (common practice)

US - Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) - UCC Article 7 applies to electronic bills of lading and warehouse receipts, and UCC Article 9 applies to security interests in electronic promissory notes.

9

# Slide 10

Canada as a member of the G7 has intention to develop a framework for use of electronic transferable records compatible with MLETR.
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Indonesia to the UN in October 2017 “It is the view of Indonesia that the model law on electronic transferable records came up at the opportune moment as guidance for us in designing our national legislation”.
Japan has established a study group dedicated to exploring the application of the MLETR to bills of lading and already possesses laws based on different principles for electronic promissory notes. As a member of the G7 has intention to develop a framework for use of electronic transferable records compatible with MLETR.
Thailand. In 2021, the Cabinet approved the inclusion of the MLETR in the Electronic Transactions Act.

10

# Slide 11

Electronic Trade Documents Act 2023 (UK)

Intended to boost UK’s international trade –more than £1.4 trillion –benefits to UK businesses over the next 10 years of £1.1 billion.
Moving goods across borders – involves transportation, insurance, finance and logistics service providers. 
UK Commission estimates that global container shipping generates billions of paper documents a year. Potential positive impacts of using electronic trade documents – financial, efficiency and environmental benefits – “are vast”.
The underlying law had been based on practices developed by merchants hundreds of years ago. The law did not allow an electronic document to be “possessed”. 
Technologies - distributed ledger technology - feasible. Without reform, the law would have “lagged behind, hindering the adoption of electronic trade documents”. 
“control” – “reliable system” - “electronic trade document” and is capable of being possessed.

11

# Slide 12

The International Chamber of Commerce estimates 80% of trade documents around the world are based on English law, and this Act serves as the cornerstone to truly digitalising international trade.
Secretary General ICC, United Kingdom Chris Southworth said:
The Electronic Trade Documents Act is a game changing piece of law not just for the UK but also for world trade. The Act will enable companies to finally remove all the paper and inefficiency that exists in trade today and ensure that future trade is far cheaper, faster, simpler and more sustainable. This presents a once in a generation opportunity to transform the trading system and help us drive much needed economic growth.
Lord Holmes of Richmond said:
It has been an honour to sit on the Special Public Bill Committee for this ground-breaking, potentially, game-changing, Act.
This is a small change in the law with the potential to make a colossal impact, unleashing innovation and investment in digital trade solutions and delivering significant economic and environmental benefits. Currently it can take days to transfer documents of title – with digital trade documents that will melt into minutes.

12

# Slide 13

Papua New Guinea, Belize, Kiribati, Bahrain, Paraguay, the Abu Dhabi Global Markets in the United Arab Emirates and Singapore.
Germany and USA have current legislation. 
US has adopted piecemeal legislation that has inspired MLETR. UCC Article 7 applies to electronic bills of lading and warehouse receipts, i.e., transferable documents. UCC Article 9 applies to security interests in electronic promissory notes.  UETA and ESIGN also contain provisions on electronic transferable records. 
Germany is considering adopting MLETR. Germany, too, has legislation on electronic bills of lading and other documents (warehouse receipts, certificates of insurance, etc) since 2014 and inspired by the Rotterdam Rules, hence compatible with MLETR.

13

# Slide 14

Spain is considering it.  
Japan has a Working Group. 
India has expressed interest.
G7 are moving towards it.
China has a strong interest dealing with Asian Development Bank (and Georgia) and is keen on considering MLETR adoption for bills of lading – in a Trade system trial.

Environmental, social, and governance (ESG) impact.  Less paper.

14

# Slide 15

MLETR – Key definition
“Transferable document or instrument” means a document or instrument issued on paper that entitles the holder to claim the performance of the obligation indicated in the document or instrument and to transfer the right to performance of the obligation indicated in the document or instrument through the transfer of that document or instrument.

“Electronic record” means information generated, communicated, received or stored by electronic means, including, where appropriate, all information logically associated with or otherwise linked together so as to become part of the record, whether generated contemporaneously or not;

15

# Slide 16

Principles 
non-discrimination against the use of electronic means
functional equivalence and 
technology neutrality 

Forms of technology including:
registries, 
tokens and 
distributed ledgers

16

# Slide 17

Article 7: An electronic transferable record shall not be denied legal effect, validity or enforceability on the sole ground that it is in electronic form.

Articles 8 and 9 provide for functional equivalence of electronic writing and electronic signatures

17

# Slide 18

Article  10 - Transferable documents or instruments

1. Where the law requires a transferable document or instrument, that requirement is met by an electronic record if: 
(a) The electronic record contains the information that would be required to be contained in a transferable document or instrument; and 
(b) A reliable method is used: 
(i) To identify that electronic record as the electronic transferable record; 
(ii) To render that electronic record capable of being subject to control from its creation until it ceases to have any effect or validity; and 
(iii) To retain the integrity of that electronic record

(a) recognises the necessity to comply with applicable substantive law for the transferable document or instrument
(b) introduces elements of identity, control and integrity of the electronic transferable record

18

# Slide 19

10(2) The criterion for assessing integrity shall be whether information contained in the electronic transferable record, including any authorized change that arises from its creation until it ceases to have any effect or validity, has remained complete and unaltered apart from any change which arises in the normal course of communication, storage and display.

19

# Slide 20

Identity

Risk of duplication

Uniqueness – singularity
“operative” - “authorised” - “the”
“Electronic transferable record” is an electronic record that complies with the requirements of article 10

20

# Slide 21

Control (Functional equivalence to physical records)

Possession = Control


# Slide 22

Article 11 Control

11(1) Where the law requires or permits the possession of a transferable document or instrument, that requirement is met with respect to an electronic transferable record if a reliable method is used: 
(a) To establish **exclusive control** of that electronic transferable record by a person; and 
(b) To identify that person as the person in control.



# Slide 23

Transfer of possession

11(2) Where the law requires or permits transfer of possession of a transferable document or instrument, that requirement is met with respect to an electronic transferable record through the transfer of control over the electronic transferable record

Transfer of possession (delivery) = Transfer of Control

11(2) - functional equivalence of transfer of the document or instrument
Paper-based world - simple delivery

23

# Slide 24

Reliable method

Reliable method - used as the standard in:
the key article on electronic transferable records (Article 10)
for Control (Article 11)
for Signature (Article 9)
Indication of time and place in electronic transferable records (Article 13)
Amendment (Article 16)
Replacement of a transferable document or instrument with an electronic transferable record (Article 17) and 
Replacement of an electronic transferable record with a transferable document or instrument (Article 18).

24

# Slide 25

Article 12

The method referred to shall be:
(a) As reliable as appropriate for the fulfilment of the function for which the method is being used, in the light of all relevant circumstances, which may include:
    (i) Any operational rules relevant to the assessment of reliability;
    (ii) The assurance of data integrity;
    (iii) The ability to prevent unauthorized access to and use of the system;
    (iv) The security of hardware and software;
    (v) The regularity and extent of audit by an independent body;
    (vi) The existence of a declaration by a supervisory body, an accreditation body or a voluntary scheme regarding the reliability of the method;
    (vii) Any applicable industry standard; or
(b) Proven in fact to have fulfilled the function by itself or together with further evidence.

25

# Slide 26

Explanatory Note to ECC described “reliable as appropriate”

Legal, technical and commercial factors that may be taken into account in determining whether the method used … is appropriate, include the following: 
(a) the sophistication of the equipment used by each of the parties;
(b) the nature of their trade activity; 
(c) the frequency at which commercial transactions take place between the parties; 
(d) the kind and size of the transaction;
(e) the function of signature requirements in a given statutory and regulatory environment;
(f) the capability of communication systems; 
(g) compliance with authentication procedures set forth by intermediaries; 
(h) the range of authentication procedures made available by any intermediary; 
(i) compliance with trade customs and practice; 
(j) the existence of insurance coverage mechanisms against unauthorized communications;
(k) the importance and the value of the information contained in the electronic communication;
(l) the availability of alternative methods of identification and the cost of implementation; 
(m) the degree of acceptance or non-acceptance of the method of identification in the relevant industry or field both at the time the method was agreed upon and the time when the electronic communication was communicated; and
(n) any other relevant factor.

26

# Slide 27

Technology

The Working Group barely discussed the technology involved
Technology neutral language used
An unspoken assurance that experts regarded the technical problems of original, and duplication resolved
Explanatory note confirms this understanding
Explanatory note mentions - use of a registry, which could be centralised, decentralised or in fact distributed – such as blockchain
Distributed ledger technology is mentioned in the Explanatory Note, although no attempt is made to explain, how where or when it should of could be utilised

27

# Slide 28

Electronic Trade Documents Act 2023

https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2023/38/contents/enacted

1.Definition of “paper trade document”
2.Definition of “electronic trade document”
3.Possession, indorsement and effect of electronic trade documents
4.Change of form

28

# Slide 29

APEC Workshop “A Path to paperless trade: Analysing the legal gaps and economic benefit of adopting or maintaining a legal framework that takes into account the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Transferable Records” - Lima Convention Centre

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
21 economies

https://www.apec.org/publications/listings
https://www.apec.org/docs/default-source/publications/2025/2/225_cti_paperless-trade.pdf

29

# Slide 30

Electronic Transferable Records

Dr Alan Davidson

30